Here comes the Brexit election
German reunification at 30
How to save the MBA
The Old-People’s Republic of China
NOVEMBER 2ND–8TH 2019

To the last drop
Saudi Arabia’s strategy to survive the end of oil

Contents

The Economist November 2nd 2019

The world this week
8 A summary of political
and business news

11
12
13
13
On the cover
The message from the world’s
biggest and wildest IPO is that
the oil industry may decline,
but it won’t go quietly: leader,
page 11. Aramco is both big
oil’s unrivalled giant and a
company vexed by challenges:
brieﬁng, page 61
• Here comes the Brexit
election But Britain’s
unpredictable vote will be about
a lot more than its relationship
with Europe: leader, page 12.
Labour is trying to woo British
voters with a radical, left-wing
agenda: brieﬁng, page 19.
Tacking to the centre will do the
parties little good, page 49. The
four faces of Boris Johnson:
Bagehot, page 52

14

Leaders
Saudi Aramco
To the last drop
British politics
The Brexit election
Latin America
Schadenfreude
The money markets
Do the right thing
Management education
The MBA, disrupted

Letters
18 On money-laundering,
hepatitis, economics,
Scotland, song choruses
Brieﬁng
19 Corbyn’s Labour Party
Downing Street calling

• The Old-People’s Republic of
China Demography may be the
Chinese economy’s biggest
hurdle, page 64

The Americas
30 The election in Argentina
31 The unrest in Chile
32 Bello Venezuela’s threat
to Colombia

33
34
35
35
36

Asia
Indonesia’s army
Bangladesh’s universities
Fighting groping in Japan
Central Asia’s borders
Banyan A boost for
Australia’s believers

China
37 Gentler, cheaper justice
38 Gathering laureates
39 Chaguan Xi’s big
contradiction

• German reuniﬁcation at 30
What did the fall of the Berlin
Wall mean to Germans? Page 44.
Central and eastern Europeans
are mostly happy with their
progress since 1989, page 47
• How to save the MBA A letter
of warning to a business dean:
leader, page 14. American
business schools are reinventing
the MBA. About time, page 55

23
24
26
26
28
29

United States
America’s economy
Southern Democrats
Voting in Mississippi
The Justice Department
A vote on genocide
Lexington Presidents
and baseball

40

Bartleby Research
suggests that happy
employees are good for
companies and investors,
page 58

41
42
42
43

Middle East & Africa
Islamic State after Abu
Bakr al-Baghdadi
Lebanon’s crisis
A bloody mess in Iraq
Africa’s narco-state
Ethnic killing in Ethiopia

1 Contents continues overleaf

5

6

Contents

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Europe
44 Thirty years after the
Berlin Wall fell
47 Eastern Europe since 1989
48 Charlemagne Why the
EU still wants Britain

49
50
51
52

64
65
66
66
67

Britain
Seeking the median voter
Where now for Brexit?
Britain’s economy
Bagehot The four Borises

68
69

71
72
73
73
74

International
53 Why people believe liars

55
57
57
58
60

75
76
77
77
78

Business
The future of MBAs
Recruiting at Stanford
AMD chips away at Intel
Bartleby Happy ﬁrms
Schumpeter The car
industry’s other Carlos

Finance & economics
The Middle-Aged
Kingdom
Remodelling HSBC
Sparring at the WTO
Turkey’s economy
Buttonwood VC after
SoftBank
Fixing the repo market
Free exchange Which
capitalism?
Science & technology
A tale of human history
Quantum computing
Livestock and seaweed
Curing concrete cancer
How science should work
Books & arts
The art of East Germany
Solace in Siena
A life of H.G. Wells
The Lakota
Johnson Automated
writing

Economic & ﬁnancial indicators
80 Statistics on 42 economies
Graphic detail
81 Societies change their minds faster than people do

Brieﬁng
61 Saudi Aramco’s IPO

Obituary
82 Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, blood-soaked scholar

Subscription service
Volume 433 Number 9167

Published since September 1843
to take part in “a severe contest between
intelligence, which presses forward,
and an unworthy, timid ignorance
obstructing our progress.”
Editorial offices in London and also:
Amsterdam, Beijing, Berlin, Brussels, Cairo,
Chicago, Johannesburg, Madrid, Mexico City,
Moscow, Mumbai, New Delhi, New York, Paris,
San Francisco, São Paulo, Seoul, Shanghai,
Singapore, Tokyo, Washington DC

For our full range of subscription offers, including digital only or print and digital combined, visit:
Economist.com/offers
You can also subscribe by mail, telephone or email:
North America
The Economist Subscription Center,
P.O. Box 46978, St. Louis, MO 63146-6978
Telephone: +1 800 456 6086
Email:
customerhelp@economist.com
Latin America & Mexico
The Economist Subscription Center,
P.O. Box 46979, St. Louis, MO 63146-6979
Telephone: +1 636 449 5702
Email:
customerhelp@economist.com

One-year print-only subscription (51 issues):

Please

United States..........................................US $189 (plus tax)
Canada......................................................CA $199 (plus tax)
Latin America.......................................US $325 (plus tax)

PEFC/29-31-58

PEFC certiﬁed
This copy of The Economist
is printed on paper sourced
from sustainably managed
forests certiﬁed to PEFC
www.pefc.org

© 2019 The Economist Newspaper Limited. All rights reserved. Neither this publication nor any part of it may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of The Economist Newspaper Limited. The Economist (ISSN 0013-0613) is published every week, except for a year-end double issue, by The Economist Newspaper Limited, 750 3rd
Avenue, 5th Floor New York, NY 10017. The Economist is a registered trademark of The Economist Newspaper Limited. Periodicals postage paid at New York, NY and additional mailing offices. Postmaster: Send address changes to The
Economist, P.O. Box 46978, St. Louis, MO 63146-6978, USA. Canada Post publications mail (Canadian distribution) sales agreement no. 40012331. Return undeliverable Canadian addresses to The Economist, PO Box 7258 STN A, Toronto,
ON M5W 1X9. GST R123236267. Printed by Quad/Graphics, Hartford, WI. 53027

8

The world this week Politics

Alberto Fernández, a Peronist,
won Argentina’s presidential
election, defeating the probusiness incumbent, Mauricio
Macri. Voters blamed Mr Macri
for a recession, an inﬂation
rate of more than 50% and a
poverty rate that tops 35%. The
newly elected vice-president,
Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, laid the groundwork for
these economic problems
when she was president from
2007 to 2015.
Bolivia’s electoral authority
declared that President Evo
Morales won re-election,
avoiding a run-oﬀ by just
0.57% of votes cast. At least two
people died and dozens were
injured in clashes between his
supporters and those of opposition candidate Carlos Mesa,
who has accused the government of rigging the vote.
Chile’s president, Sebastián
Piñera, reshuﬄed his cabinet
and agreed to spend extra
money on pensions and health
care and to raise taxes on high
earners, after 1.2m people
demonstrated in Santiago, the
country’s capital, against
inequality and threadbare
public services. At least 20
people died in rioting and
arson attacks. Chile cancelled
plans to host a summit of Asian
and Paciﬁc leaders in November and a un climate meeting
in December.
Claudia López, a crusader
against corruption, was elected
mayor of Bogotá, Colombia’s
capital. Ms López is the ﬁrst
woman and ﬁrst gay person to
be elected to the job. The regional elections were a setback
for the Democratic Centre
party of the president, Iván
Duque, who lost control of
strongholds like Medellín.

A land divided
A constitutional amendment
that strips Jammu & Kashmir
of statehood and divides it into
two territories administered
directly by India’s national
government came into eﬀect.
Life in the Kashmir valley has
been severely disrupted since
the government announced
the change in August, because
of restrictions on communications and travel, as well as
protests and militant violence.

A court in Myanmar sentenced
ﬁve members of a satirical
troupe to a year’s hard labour
for mocking the army’s role in
politics.
King Maha Vajiralongkorn of
Thailand dismissed two aides
for adultery, a week after he
stripped his oﬃcial mistress of
her titles for disloyalty.
Scores of people died when a
gas stove being used by passengers to cook breakfast
aboard a train in Pakistan
exploded. It was the country’s
worst rail disaster in a decade.
Hong Kong’s government
barred a pro-democracy activist, Joshua Wong, from standing in district elections. It
linked the decision to Mr
Wong’s calls for “self-determination” for the territory. Meanwhile, oﬃcial ﬁgures showed
that Hong Kong has slipped
into a recession.
Nearly 400 of China’s most
senior oﬃcials gathered in Beijing for a secretive meeting of
the Communist Party’s Central
Committee. The agenda was
described as “important issues
concerning how to uphold and
improve the socialist system
with Chinese characteristics”.
A ﬁtting end
The pious rapist in charge of
Islamic State, Abu Bakr alBaghdadi, killed himself to
avoid capture by American
soldiers. The jihadist group
once controlled territory the
size of Britain, but lost its last
scrap of land earlier this year.
Mr Baghdadi was found in

The Economist November 2nd 2019

north-west Syria, where he was
chased down a tunnel. He
detonated a suicide-vest,
murdering two of his own
children. Donald Trump said:
“He died like a dog.”
Saad Hariri, the prime minister
of Lebanon, resigned amid
demonstrations over the struggling economy and poor governance. Some fear his resignation will beneﬁt Hizbullah,
the Shia militia-cum-politicalparty, whose thugs have tried
to break up the protests.
Protests resumed in Iraq,
where dozens of people were
killed by the security forces
and other armed groups. In the
holy city of Karbala masked
gunmen reportedly shot dead
18 people. The protesters are
angry about corruption, a lack
of jobs and poor services.
Mozambique’s main opposition party asked the courts to
annul the result of the recent
presidential election, which
the incumbent, Filipe Nyusi,
won with 73% of the vote. The
election has rekindled enmity
between the ruling and opposition parties, which signed a
peace deal in August.
Corblimey, another election

Boris Johnson, Britain’s prime
minister, admitted that he
could not “get Brexit done” by
October 31st, and called a general election. The eu granted
an extension until January 31st.
Jeremy Corbyn (above), the
far-left leader of the opposition
Labour Party, reversed course
and acquiesced to the election.
The date was set for December
12th. Voters will not directly be
asked whether they approve of
Mr Johnson’s hard Brexit deal,
which bears little resemblance

to what they were promised in
the Brexit referendum in 2016.
America’s House of Representatives voted to recognise
the mass slaughter of Armenians by Turks during the ﬁrst
world war as genocide. The
vote took place on Turkey’s
national day. us-Turkish relations, already strained by
Turkey’s invasion of northern
Syria, grew more so.
Die Linke, a German far-left
party that descends from the
East German Communists,
won a state election in Thuringia. The far-right Alternative
for Germany came second.
Collectively, centrist parties
won less than half the vote.
In another upset, Italy’s
Northern League led an antiimmigration populist coalition
to victory in an election in
Umbria, a hitherto solidly
left-wing region, defeating an
alliance led by the country’s
ruling Democratic Party and
Five Star Movement.
The burning Golden State
Millions of people in northern
California were again left
without power, as wildﬁres,
whipped up by strong, hot
winds, raged around the Bay
Area and surrounding counties. The local utility, Paciﬁc
Gas & Electric, has imposed the
blackouts because of worries
that its power lines may spark
the ﬂames. The Los Angeles
area also battled wildﬁres.

A ban on most abortions in
Alabama was blocked by a
federal judge, two weeks before
it was due to come into force.
That makes it likelier that the
Supreme Court will tackle the
issue, which is what the ban’s
proponents want.
John Kelly, Donald Trump’s
former chief of staﬀ, said he
had advised him not to employ
a “yes man” as his replacement, as that would lead to the
president’s impeachment. Mr
Trump’s press secretary said
Mr Kelly had been “totally
unequipped to handle the
genius of our great president”.

The world this week Business
The Federal Reserve cut its
benchmark interest rate for
the third time this year, shaving oﬀ another quarter of a
percentage point to a range of
between 1.5% and 1.75%. Arguments have raged at the central
bank about the need for further
easing in America’s still robust
economy. Many have read the
runes of the carefully worded
statement by Jerome Powell,
the Fed’s chairman, that “policy is likely to remain appropriate”, to suggest that future
reductions are on hold.
United States
GDP, % increase on previous quarter
at an annualised rate
4

Trump
takes
office

3

from a former executive accusing it of selling contaminated
vaping pods to retailers. It is
another blow for e-cigarettes,
which are under scrutiny in
dozens of cases of lung disease.
General Electric reported
another huge quarterly net
loss, this time of $9.5bn, as it
booked charges connected to
its restructuring. Some $8.7bn
of that relates to writing down
its investment in Baker
Hughes, an oil-services ﬁrm.
The long-awaited ipo of Saudi
Aramco was reportedly ready
to be launched on November
3rd. Shares in the world’s biggest oil company, owned by the
Saudi state, are expected to
start trading in mid-December.

2
1
0

2016

17

18

19

Source: US Bureau of Economic Analysis

Oﬃcial ﬁgures showed that the
American economy grew by
1.9% at an annualised rate in
the third quarter. The data
underlined the Fed ratesetters’
conundrum; consumer and
government spending remained buoyant, though business investment was limp.
Groupe psa, the maker of the
Peugeot car brand, and Fiat
Chrysler Automobiles agreed
to merge, creating the world’s
fourth-largest car manufacturer. Carmakers are under increasing pressure to consolidate in an industry beset by
rising costs and disruptive
technologies. Earlier this year
Fiat Chrysler tried to engineer a
merger with Renault, but it hit
a dead end when the French
government, which owns 15%
of Renault, withheld its
support.
The recent strike at General
Motors is now thought to have
cost the company $2.9bn. The
40-day strike was the longest at
the carmaker since 1970.
In a week when it announced
that it would have to lay oﬀ up
to 15% of its workforce, Juul
which dominates the market
for e-cigarettes, faced a lawsuit

Always in motion is the future
Microsoft won a $10bn contract to create a “war-ﬁghter”
cloud-computing system for
the Pentagon. The decision to
award the Joint Enterprise
Defence Infrastructure (jedi)
project to Microsoft was a
surprise, as Amazon had been
the front-runner. It might yet
challenge the decision, especially given Donald Trump’s
animosity towards Jeﬀ Bezos,
Amazon’s boss. Mr Trump
reportedly wanted to “screw”
Amazon over the contract.

The Economist November 2nd 2019 9

Arm, a chip designer based in
Britain, is to resume supplying
components to Huawei, a
Chinese tech ﬁrm sanctioned
by the American government.
Arm is now conﬁdent that its
designs do not fall under
American export-control rules
after all. The ﬁrm is one of
Huawei’s most important, and
least replaceable, suppliers.
WhatsApp is to sue the nso
Group, an Israeli maker of
commercial spyware. The
encrypted chat service, which
is owned by Facebook, alleges
that nso’s malware was used to
spy on the conversations of
1,400 people in 20 countries,
including lawyers, journalists
and human-rights advocates.
Facebook reported a surge in
revenue and proﬁt for the third
quarter. Mark Zuckerberg used
the occasion to reﬂect on “the
importance of standing for
voice and free expression”, as
he defended his position not to
“censor” politicians. Earlier,
Twitter announced a ban on
all political advertising on its
platform worldwide.
Apple’s quarterly earnings
retold a now-familiar tale.
Sales from the iPhone were
down, though revenues from
wearable devices and services
jumped; those two segments

accounted for 30% of the company’s sales in the quarter.
Murray Energy, America’s
fourth-largest coal miner, ﬁled
for bankruptcy protection. It is
the latest ﬁrm to go to the wall
in an industry that has been
squeezed by natural gas and
renewable energy, despite
Donald Trump’s many promises to save coal jobs.
lvmh, the world’s largest
luxury-goods company, made
an unsolicited bid to buy Tiﬀany, a jewellery ﬁrm. Tiﬀany
valued the deal at $14.5bn. The
oﬀer is the largest acquisition
yet attempted by Bernard
Arnault, lvmh’s multi-billionaire boss, and another big bet
on bling; in 2011 lvmh took a
majority stake in Bulgari.
Mass tourism it ain’t
Virgin Galactic became the
ﬁrst space-tourism venture to
become a publicly traded
company when it ﬂoated in
New York (it avoided an ipo by
combining the business with
an already-listed investment
vehicle). Galactic thinks it can
eventually turn a proﬁt by
persuading enough rich folk to
pay $250,000 for a 90-minute,
50-mile trip above the Earth’s
surface, part of its “mission” of
“democratising space”.

Leaders

Leaders 11

To the last drop
The message from the world’s biggest and wildest ipo is that the oil industry may decline, but it won’t go quietly

T

he drilling of the ﬁrst modern well in Pennsylvania in 1859
set oil on a path that led to the heart of economics and geopolitics. Oil fuelled the rise of the West’s consumer culture; it
helped determine who won the second world war and prompted
a global economic crisis in the 1970s. Over the past 20 years China
has become the second-biggest consumer of crude, while America’s fracking revolution has meant it is close to being a net energy
exporter for the ﬁrst time since the 1950s. Now a new chapter in
oil’s story is unfolding: the prospect of stagnating or falling demand as the world shifts to cleaner energy. As in the past, this era
promises startling economic and geopolitical change.
Consider the imminent stockmarket ﬂotation of Saudi
Aramco, which produces 10m barrels of oil a day, or 11% of the global total. As well as Arabian super-light, Aramco pumps out superlatives and controversy (see Brieﬁng). Worth well over $1trn,
it could, once listed, be the world’s most valuable public ﬁrm,
squeezing past Apple. The initial public oﬀering has been delayed several times; a big Aramco processing plant was hit by a
missile strike in September and the ﬁrm is ultimately controlled
by Muhammad bin Salman, an autocratic royal with blood on his
hands. But take a moment to look beyond this. Aramco’s underlying strategy is to be the last oilman standing if the industry
shrinks, pointing to the upheavals to come.
The term “peak oil” was coined in 1956 by M.
King Hubbert, a geologist worried about the
stuﬀ running out. Today the phrase is back but
for the opposite reason: the prospect of dwindling demand. That may seem odd given that this
has grown by 1.4% a year since 2008. But the
people running energy companies have long
horizons, and on that timescale the picture for
oil is darkened by urban pollution and climate
change. Oil is responsible for a third of global energy use and a
similar share of carbon emissions.
Many oil ﬁrms still say that production will creep up over the
next decade, to slightly above today’s level of 95m barrels per day
(b/d), and then plateau. But output will need to drop to 45m-70m
b/d by 2050 if the world is to stop temperatures rising more than
1.5-2°C above their pre-industrial level. It would help, too, if there
was a shift to cleaner oilﬁelds, whose crude emits a ﬁfth less than
the dirtiest ones. Though oil bosses insist, in public at least, that
oil remains the planet’s indispensable fuel, they can feel the
growing stigma. Public opinion is shifting in the West, heralding
tighter rules on emissions. And, in a sign of jumpiness, some
Western ﬁrms have favoured short-term projects rather than
sink their capital in decades-long bets on oil’s future.
If demand does fall, some products and producers are more
vulnerable than others. Over a third of all oil is used in cars and
lorries which could eventually be ﬁtted with electric engines. It
is harder to ﬁnd a substitute for the oil in petrochemicals and
plastics. Common sense suggests that the highest-cost and dirtiest oil ﬁrms will tend to go out of business ﬁrst. If so, an industry
that has become gargantuan over 160 years will shrink to a core of
producers that fulﬁl the world’s residual demand at the lowest ﬁnancial and environmental cost.

Many environmental activists fear this energy transition will
never happen. But, in fact, it ﬁts with Aramco’s strategy and pitch
to investors. The ﬁrm spends just $3 to lift a barrel from beneath
the desert, less than almost anyone else. The emissions from extracting Saudi oil are rock-bottom, too. Aramco is expanding in
petrochemicals and locking in customers in Asia—in August it
bought a $15bn stake in the chemicals arm of Reliance, an Indian
giant. Saudi Arabia has promised investors they will get steady
dividends whatever the weather. Implicit in the kingdom’s approach is that, if and when oil demand falters, Aramco will be the
producer of last resort.
A cleaner planet is in everyone’s interests. But a shrinking oil
industry could mean more, not less, turbulence for energy markets and geopolitics. Take energy markets ﬁrst. The optimistic
case is that supply and demand will taper down in tandem, and
that the price of oil will fall along with the cost of producing the
last barrel needed to satisfy ebbing demand. But downsizing an
industry with $16trn of capital and at least 10m employees is never going to be smooth. Because oilﬁelds naturally deplete, a
drought in capital spending could cause a price spike. Each ﬁrm
and country, including Saudi Arabia, will face a choice between
holding back supply so as to bolster proﬁts and tax revenues and
opening the taps to grab market share and use up reserves, whatever the price, before it is too late. The opec cartel, which combines high- and low-cost producers, could implode. And as production focuses
on fewer ﬁelds, the risk of disruption from terrorism or accidents will rise.
The political implications are just as big.
Twenty-six countries rely on oil income for 5%
or more of their gdp, says the World Bank (the
average for them is 18%). If economic logic prevails, producers with the dearest and dirtiest oil—including Algeria, Brazil, Canada, Nigeria and Venezuela—should wind
down output, but that would be painful and, for some, devastating. America, meanwhile, remains wedded to oil, which meets
40% of its energy needs. Its thirst has been satisﬁed by the fracking boom, especially in the Permian basin in Texas. Yet fracking
is dirty and new projects need an oil price of $40-50 a barrel to
break-even, at least twice the level Aramco requires. For the sake
of the climate and eﬃciency, the fracking industry should eventually shrink. That, though, would make America more reliant
on foreigners, just as its politics have turned inward.
Till kingdom come
And then there is Saudi Arabia itself. Aramco’s pitch to investors
will boast of its abundant, cheap and relatively clean oil. That
much is true. But it will not dwell on the country’s jobless youth
or opaque court politics. Perhaps the proceeds of the ipo will
help modernise the Saudi economy; perhaps not. Investors betting on Aramco as the last oil major standing in 30 years’ time
will have to consider the risk of revolution or invasion. Aramco’s
ﬂotation is a sign that the end of oil could be in sight. But it is also
a reminder that the black stuﬀ’s capacity to cause economic and
political havoc will be undiminished for decades to come. 7

12

Leaders

The Economist November 2nd 2019

British politics

Here comes the Brexit election
But Britain’s unpredictable vote will be about a lot more than its relationship with Europe

A

fortnight before Christmas, winter fêtes and school nativity plays will be put on hold as village halls are once again
converted into polling stations. Britain faces its third general
election in little more than four years, a result of the fact that today’s mps cannot agree on how to leave the European Union—or
even whether to leave at all. Boris Johnson, the Conservative
prime minister, promises that with a majority he will “get Brexit
done”. Jeremy Corbyn, his Labour rival, proposes a second referendum, with the option to call the whole thing oﬀ.
That alone would represent a momentous choice. Yet in what
is being billed as the Brexit election, more is at stake than Britain’s relationship with Europe. The far-left Mr Corbyn promises
to put the state at the heart of the economy, whereas Mr Johnson’s Tories seem to be moving towards a more freewheeling
form of capitalism. At the same time, both potential prime ministers would pick at the ties between the nations of the United
Kingdom. Britain’s Christmas contest is its most important in
living memory. And with volatile polls, upstart parties and new
ideological axes that deﬁne voters, it is the least predictable, too.
We have long argued that a second referendum would be a
better way to break the Brexit logjam. The Commons is split over
Mr Johnson’s deal—possibly fatally—just as it was over the rather better one negotiated by his predecessor, Theresa May. The
clearest and fairest solution would be to ask voters whether they would take his terms over the
arrangement they already have, as eu citizens.
But Parliament has proved as incapable of organising a second referendum as it has of agreeing on anything else. And rather than see his
plan amended, Mr Johnson has chosen an election. For now, a referendum is oﬀ the table.
Voters face a confusing and deeply unsatisfying choice. Parties have set out Brexit proposals to cater to every
taste: an instant no-deal exit, courtesy of the Brexit Party; a barebones, “Canada-minus” deal with the Tories; a second referendum from Labour; and cancelling Brexit altogether, via the Liberal Democrats. However, voters must balance these policies
against the rest of the parties’ programmes, which in some cases
are extreme. Labour, in particular, proposes a new economic
model in which the state would gain enormous clout. Some Remainers have taken to saying that Mr Corbyn, who is likely to enter Downing Street only with the support of other parties, would
lack the votes to push through the more dangerous parts of his
manifesto. That is wishful thinking. Even a minority Labour government could do profound damage (see Brieﬁng). Whether the
next prime minister is hard-Brexiteer Mr Johnson or socialist Mr
Corbyn, the economy will take a beating.
Both men would also tug at the fraying union. Mr Johnson’s
Brexit plan would push Northern Ireland ever closer to the Republic of Ireland. Mr Corbyn would probably rely on the backing
of the Scottish National Party to get to Downing Street. The price
of its support would be a prompt second referendum on Scottish
independence. Polls suggest the nationalists might well win.
Voters who want the United Kingdom to stay together, or who
dislike both socialism and Brexit—potentially, rather a lot of

them—will thus be left holding their nose as they mark their ballot paper. And a great many more will feel despair at the result.
The next prime minister will enter Downing Street having won
well under half the vote. If the outcome of the Brexit referendum
left 48% feeling hard done by, this election will leave a large majority feeling that they have lost.
Who will be on that losing side? The race is wildly unpredictable. Polls put the Tories roughly 12 points ahead of Labour. But
the polls are volatile. Only a few months ago the Tories were
brieﬂy in third place. Mrs May started her campaign in 2017 with
a 20-point lead and ﬁve weeks later lost her majority. Since then
things have become more complex still, with the birth of the
hardline Brexit Party (which will take votes from the Tories) and
the rise of the pro-Remain Lib Dems (who will pinch more supporters from Labour). Under the ﬁrst-past-the-post system, better adapted to two dominant parties, the make-up of Parliament
may bear little relation to the national breakdown of the poll,
adding to the disillusion of voters.
Last time Britain held an election—only two years ago—we lamented the “missing middle” in its politics. Since then the improvement in the fortunes of the Lib Dems, to whom we gave our
conditional backing, has broadened the menu somewhat. But
the two main parties have become even less interested in the
centre ground. Elections used to be contests to
capture the median voter. But almost no one
holds a middling position on Brexit, so both Labour and the Tories are pitching to the extremes
(see Britain section). Even the Lib Dems, regrettably, have adopted a strategy of pursuing only
hardcore Remainers. This promises to be the
most divisive election in many years.
What is more, the divide is along a new axis.
The old left-right split, along economic lines, has gradually been
giving way to a new ﬁssure, deﬁned in terms of culture. Brexit
has accelerated this, redrawing the political battleground. The
Tories are going for working-class seats with a promise of hard
Brexit and social conservatism. Labour, meanwhile, is going for
well-oﬀ, urban areas, preaching Remain and social liberalism.
The tactics may not work—Mrs May tried something similar in
2017, and found that working-class northerners were still allergic
to the Tories. But the more the parties head in this new direction,
the more polarised politics will become. Questions of economics
can often be settled by a compromise. Disagreements about
identity and culture are much harder to resolve.
Another divisive contest may be worth it if it at last provides
an answer to the great Brexit question. But there is a possibility
that even this latest democratic exercise fails to produce a decisive outcome. The rise of small parties has made it hard for anyone to win a big majority. If Mr Johnson is returned with only a
small one, he will be at the mercy of the hardline Brexiteers in his
party, just as Mrs May was. And if Mr Corbyn enters Downing
Street with the support of other parties, he too may ﬁnd it hard to
solve the great riddle. The coming election will have profound
consequences for Britain. But don’t be surprised if a year from
now the country is still arguing about how to “get Brexit done”. 7

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Leaders

13

Latin America

Schadenfreude in the south
Economic liberalism is not the cause of the region’s discontent

F

or defenders of free markets in Latin America, October was
a dismal month. In Chile, free-marketeers’ favourite economy in the region, protests against a rise in fares on the Santiago
metro descended into rioting and then became a 1.2m-person
march against inequality and inadequate public services. Sebastián Piñera, the centre-right president, sacked some oﬃcials and
promised reforms. In Argentina voters booted out the pro-business president, Mauricio Macri, after one term. Instead, they
elected Alberto Fernández, whose Peronist movement prefers a
muscular state to vigorous markets (see Americas section).
Both countries are rising up against “neoliberal” governments, claimed politicians and pundits. Nicolás Maduro, Venezuela’s socialist dictator, tweeted praise for Argentina’s “heroic”
people and for Chile’s “noble” ones. In this, he
speaks for much of the left.
His glee is misplaced—because the assumptions behind it are wrong. Despite its ﬂaws,
Chile is a success story. Its income per person is
the second-highest in Latin America and close
to that of Portugal and Greece. Since the end of a
brutal dictatorship in 1990 Chile’s poverty rate
has dropped from 40% to less than 10%. Inﬂation is consistently low and public ﬁnances are well managed.
Argentina is a failure, but not for the reasons Mr Maduro imagines. Its economy is in recession, inﬂation is over 50% and the
poverty rate is over 35%. This was not caused by Mr Macri’s “neoliberalism”. Inheriting an economic mess in 2015, he made mistakes of tactics and timing, among them hesitation in cutting the
ﬁscal deﬁcit. But the underlying problems stem from decades of
mismanagement, largely by Peronist governments, which have
led to repeated defaults, currency crises and high inﬂation. Almost twice as rich as Chile in the 1970s, Argentina is now poorer.
It would beneﬁt from becoming more like its liberal neighbour.
This is no argument for complacency in Chile. The Chilean
model, drawn up in the 1970s by economists trained at the Uni-

versity of Chicago, called for a small state and a big role for citizens in providing for their own education and welfare. It has
evolved—there is, say, more money for poor pupils; but Chileans
still feel underserved by the state. They save for their own pensions, but many have not contributed long enough to provide for
a tolerable retirement. Waiting times in the public health service
are long. So people pay extra for care. Access to university has expanded, but students graduate with high debts, only to discover
that the best jobs go to people with family connections.
Chile undertaxes the rich. Oligopolies have colluded to ﬁx
prices in industries from drugs to poultry. Income inequality is
lower than the regional average, but it is high by rich-country
standards. More than a quarter of workers are in informal jobs.
Even middle-class Chileans live in cramped
housing. Behind the fare-rise rebellion lies a
pervasive sense of unfairness.
With healthy public ﬁnances, Chile can afford to deal with these grievances. Mr Piñera
plans to spend more on pensions. He seeks to
speed up the passage of a scheme to cover catastrophic illness. He will create a new top income-tax bracket of 40%, ﬁve points higher
than the current rate. Reform needs to go further. Trust-busters
need to crack down on oligopolies. Chileans need cheaper, swifter health care and better schools. The tax system relies on vat for
nearly half of revenues—and vat, though eﬃcient, is regressive,
so the state should take less or redistribute more.
Mr Fernández, facing an economic crisis in Argentina, has a
tougher task. He will have to renegotiate debt (yet again), maintain a tight ﬁscal policy and restore conﬁdence in the peso. He
cannot ease the pain by ramping up public spending. It is already
more than 40% of gdp, compared with 25% in Chile. In the long
run, Argentina will need a smaller state and a more competitive
private sector. While Mr Piñera ﬁxes the Chilean model, Mr Fernández would do well to emulate it. 7

The money markets

Do the right thing
The Fed must ﬁx the jittery repo market—but not by cutting corners

M

ost people have—mercifully—not had to think about the
money markets since the ﬁnancial crisis, when obscurities
such as libor brieﬂy became part of the discussion. It is time
once again to pay a bit more attention because New York’s “repo”
market is not working as it should. Every day more than $1trn is
borrowed and lent by ﬁnancial ﬁrms through repos, which involve posting Treasury securities as collateral. The interest rate
that borrowers pay ripples through the global ﬁnancial system.
Hence, if the repo market malfunctions, it matters.
That is what happened in September, when rates brieﬂy
spiked as high as 10%; they should be much closer to the Federal

Reserve’s target interest rate, which this week was cut to 1.5-1.75%
(see United States section). The surge indicated that some ﬁnancial ﬁrms did not have enough cash and were scrambling to get
hold of more. Although repo rates have eased back since then,
the underlying problem has still not gone away.
The cash shortage has three causes (see Finance section). As
the Fed has reversed its policy of buying long-term bonds,
known as quantitative easing (qe), cash has been sucked out of
the system. Also, the underlying demand for cash from ﬁnancial
ﬁrms and their clients is rising. That reﬂects a growing economy
and lumpy factors such as a cluster of large tax bills. Higher de- 1

14

Leaders

The Economist November 2nd 2019

2 mand also reﬂects the government’s budget deﬁcit of nearly

$1trn, or 4.6% of gdp, which requires record amounts of government bonds to be issued, the buyers of which have to pay in cash.
The third cause is that the cash sitting on the books of ﬁnancial ﬁrms is largely held by a few big commercial banks. They
hoard it partly because of post-crisis regulations that are meant
to make them safer by requiring them to have big liquidity buﬀers and partly because they fear the reputational damage of miscalculating and of ever being found short of funds again. When a
few big commercial banks hoard piles of cash, other ﬁnancial
ﬁrms, including investment banks and dealers, have less.
What to do? Since September the Fed has opted for a shortterm ﬁx, by lending each morning somewhere in the region of
$50bn-100bn overnight to ensure the ﬁnancial system has
enough money to keep repo rates under control. But this is uncomfortable because it involves repeated overnight loans and
because the recipients are often Wall Street banks and traders,
who are not obvious candidates for the open-ended receipt of

support from the Fed, even if the loans are safely collateralised.
Another option would be to alter the post-crisis rules that require banks to hold lots of cash. On October 29th Steven Mnuchin, the treasury secretary, ﬂoated this idea. But that risks watering down the reforms made after the crisis.
Copperwork, not duct tape
There is a better answer. The Fed has begun to permanently increase the amount of cash held by ﬁnancial ﬁrms, by buying
$60bn-worth of shorter-dated Treasury bonds oﬀ them per
month. Critics will say this represents more qe by stealth—but
that is nonsense. Providing the bonds are short-dated, the Fed
will have no mechanical impact on long-term interest rates—in
contrast to when it conducts qe. And before the ﬁnancial crisis,
it was routine for the Fed to buy and sell short-term Treasuries in
order to ensure that the money markets were transmitting monetary policy smoothly. Do this and, with luck, most people will
once more be able to forget about the repo market. 7

The future of management education

The MBA, disrupted
We have obtained a copy of a recent letter to a business dean

Dear Dean Whiteboard,
n behalf of the trustees of the Gordon Gekko Business
School, I write with a helicopter view on our beloved institution. There is good news and bad. First, congratulations are in order. Under your leadership, GorGeBS has again been named by
The Economist as one of the world’s top 100 business schools.
The bad news is that our best-of-breed status is in jeopardy
because the very business model of our school faces tectonic
challenges (see Business section). Demand is plunging. Our mba
applications are down by a quarter. Across America, applications
to business schools have fallen for ﬁve years in a row. Even at
Harvard, they are down this year by about 6%.
One reason is a drop in international applicants, many of
whom are put oﬀ by America’s anti-immigration policies. But before you rush to blame all
those law graduates staﬃng up government departments, the bigger factor is that we are charging too much. Our mba costs nearly twice as
much as it did a decade ago, but nobody believes
we are delivering twice as much value.
We are also failing to grapple with technological disruption. The time I spent getting my
mba on our leafy campus by the fountainhead of the River Rand
constituted two of the best years of my life. Even so, I am beginning to think that your dogged defence of a bricks-and-mortar
strategy is wrong-headed. Online business education can deliver
world-class thought leadership, too.
Worse, the relevance of our curriculum is being challenged.
The students roaming our hallowed halls today are not the redblooded, Darwinian capitalists who used to strive for business
degrees. They are in a very diﬀerent mind space, demanding that
we go beyond our traditional teachings on the primacy of shareholder value to embrace stakeholder value.
Going forward, we need three priorities. First, to get costs under control. The soup-to-nuts cost for an mba at Stanford is

O

$232,000—out of our ballpark. The ﬁve-star accommodation,
gourmet cuisine and other perks on our campus are way over the
top. So are some of our packages, even if we haven’t got quite as
carried away as Columbia Business School, which, it was recently revealed, paid over $420,000 a year to a professor teaching
three classes a year and $330,000 to untenured junior faculty.
But that is low-hanging fruit. We also should embrace technology. Some schools oﬀer hybrid degrees, mixing the soft skills
learned on campus with the convenience of digital delivery. Boston University’s Questrom School of Business has gone the
whole hog and now oﬀers its full mba online for just $24,000. If
we do not adapt it will eat our lunch. And we need to get better at
teaching technology. Our curriculum ought to drill down on the
technical skills employers want, to deal with artiﬁcial intelligence and data analytics. No wonder ﬁrms themselves are stepping up. Accenture
alone spends $1bn training staﬀ in-house; the
Silicon Valley giants spend even more. Those investments are cannibalising executive education, our cash cow.
The trickiest challenge is dealing with the
backlash against capitalism. As future ceos, our
charges must manage the conﬂicting demands placed on ﬁrms
by myriad interested parties while still fulﬁlling their ﬁduciary
duties to shareholders. The curriculum can no longer rely on
one-dimensional case studies. We need to be better at playing
back the trade-oﬀs facing bosses navigating a 3d environment.
The threat is existential. In the past ﬁve years, nearly a tenth
of the full-time mba programmes in America have disappeared.
From Florida to Iowa, business schools have stopped oﬀering the
degree altogether. If we are to survive, never mind elevate GorGeBS to the top of the rankings, we need to start thinking outside
the box and spearhead the next management revolution.
Let’s touch base oﬄine soon.
ivor hangout 7

16

Executive focus

Executive focus

17

18

Letters
Taking on the launderers
As a companion piece to your
recent jocular guidance for
kleptocrats on “How to keep
your ill-gotten loot” (October
12th), you could oﬀer governments advice on how to expose
the schemes used by the dishonest to hide their illicit
funds. Here are a few suggestions. First, end anonymous
shell companies by creating
public registers of who actually
controls corporations. Even
the Cayman Islands has committed itself to implementing
such a register. Second, make
global anti-money-laundering
oversight more transparent.
Multilateral enforcement is
often spoiled by international
horse-trading over sanctions
behind closed doors.
Third, keep a closer eye on
the intermediaries. Your accompanying article (“Catch me
if you can”) mentions that
traders in luxury goods such as
yachts are failing to ﬂag suspicious transactions, even when
they are obliged to do so. Such
businesses, as well as bankers,
estate agents, accountants and
lawyers should all be held
responsible for their role in
facilitating money-laundering.
If the nerves of “pilfering
potentates and their progeny”
are really to be rattled, governments must close the loopholes which continue to make
their countries a haven for
illicit wealth.
patricia moreira
Managing director
Transparency International
Berlin

Whether intermediaries—
lawyers, accountants, estate
agents—are either passively
complicit in or actively supporting money-laundering
they are rightly denoted as
enablers. Estate agents in
particular have weak systems
of due diligence and rarely ﬁle
reports of suspicious transactions. They are almost never
punished. Britain has imposed
only three recorded sentences
on intermediaries under the
Proceeds of Crime Act between
2002 and 2018. It is far more
common that no action is
taken or, in precious few cases,

The Economist November 2nd 2019

a nominal ﬁne is issued by a
tribunal.
By increasing the resources
of the state used to crack down
on enablers, the ability of
kleptocrats to access the global
spoils of their grand corruption will be severely reduced.
john heathershaw
Professor of international
relations
University of Exeter
Curing hepatitis is a priority
The Global Fund’s progress on
hiv, tuberculosis and malaria
is great (“Building tomorrow”,
October 12th). However, the
World Health Organisation
estimates that each year deaths
from viral hepatitis (types B
and C) are greater than hiv and
more than double that from
malaria. This is all the more
striking when one considers
there is a vaccine for hepatitis
B and a highly eﬀective short
course cure for hepatitis C. Yet
hepatitis is largely oﬀ the radar
of global health programmes.
brigg reilley
Portland, Oregon

Economic discipline
The world economy’s new
rules are not so “strange”
(Special report, October 12th).
You advised monetary policy to
target three things: a long-run,
instead of short-term, inﬂation
rate; nominal gdp, as opposed
to inﬂation or unemployment;
and ﬁscal reforms, emphasising automatic stabilisers.
Milton Friedman would have
endorsed those ﬁrst two targets. I followed them when I
designed country programmes
at the imf in the 1990s. You
could have been braver in
recognising that economists
do not understand well the
nature of economic growth, or
sustainable economic growth.
Strengthening “automatic
stabilisers” (such as unemployment beneﬁts) is not
enough. The structure of tax
and government spending
must be improved to aﬀect
market behaviour and raise
eﬃciency and investment.
Economic programmes face
diﬃculties in drawing up ﬁscal
and other structural reforms,

particularly at the micro or
retail level. This year’s Nobel
prize in economics has highlighted the use of ﬁeld experiments to ﬁnd out how we can
engineer behaviour to sustain
higher economic growth. Such
research would improve policy
by moving from nominal to
real gdp growth targeting.
gopal yadav
Alexandria, Virginia
Your suggestion that a central
bank should transfer “an equal
amount to the bank account of
every adult citizen” when the
economy slumps, and that this
would not involve redistribution, sounds odd (“The world
economy’s strange new rules”,
October 12th). Aside from its
other problems (such as people
with more than one account, or
joint accounts) the fact that
many poorer people do not
have a bank account means
that the relatively aﬄuent
would gain. This is a redistribution by any reasonable
deﬁnition.
neil garston
Emeritus professor of
economics
California State University,
Los Angeles
Why Scotland should remain
Regarding the push for another
vote on whether Scotland
should leave the United Kingdom (“The other referendum”,
October 19th), the Scottish
National Party has played its
Brexit cards cannily, but it
must not underestimate the
common sense of most Scots,
or the fatigue following divisive referendums in 2014 and
2016. In recent polling by Survation, commissioned by
Scotland in Union, only 27% of
Scottish people supported the
snp’s plan for another referendum before May 2021. A majority thought another referendum would make Scottish
society more divided.
When asked whether Scotland should “remain” in the uk
or “leave” (rather than a yes/no
formulation, which the Electoral Commission dismissed
for the uk-wide Brexit referendum in 2016), 59% said Scotland should remain. This is a

long way from the overwhelming majority for separation
which Nicola Sturgeon, the
snp’s leader and ﬁrst minister
of Scotland, would like before
calling for another vote.
If Brexit will harm the
Scottish economy, Scexit
would be worse. The Scottish
government’s statistics show
that 60% of Scottish trade goes
to the rest of the uk; that Scottish public spending is boosted
by £1,968 ($2,530) per person
via Westminster’s Barnett
formula; and that Scotland’s
deﬁcit is over twice as high as
the 3% level which would be
required if an independent
Scotland were to try to join the
European Union.
alastair cameron
Director
Scotland in Union
Glasgow
The chorus line
“Don’t stop me now” (October
5th) reported on how the algorithms behind music streaming spur songwriters to get to
the chorus in the ﬁrst 15 seconds. That brought back some
wonderful memories of how
songs used to be crafted. You
mentioned the two-minute
opening before Bono starts
singing on U2’s “Where the
streets have no name”. A decade before that the title track
on “Bat Out of Hell”, Meatloaf’s
masterpiece, romps around for
three minutes before we hear
the chorus, which itself lasts
40 seconds. This is typical for a
seven-track album, which has
sold 43m copies and counting.
All the way back in 1972
Jethro Tull hit number one in
America with “Thick As a
Brick,” a song that admirably
arrives at the refrain within the
ﬁrst minute, but does not
return to it until 42 minutes
later at the song’s close. Today’s
music fans are too impatient.
alex dew
Salt Lake City

Letters are welcome and should be
addressed to the Editor at
The Economist, The Adelphi Building,
1-11 John Adam Street, London WC2N 6HT
Email: letters@economist.com
More letters are available at:
Economist.com/letters

Brieﬁng Corbyn’s Labour Party

Downing Street calling

Labour is trying to woo British voters with a radical, left-wing agenda

S

hortly before the ﬁnancial crisis of
2008, a little-known Labour mp published a 64-page pamphlet. In “Another
World is Possible: A Manifesto for 21st Century Socialism”, John McDonnell laid out
an economic vision which clashed with the
slick, pro-business mantra of Tony Blair’s
New Labour. It praised participatory democracy in Venezuela and hailed co-ops in
the Basque country, while calling for the
sweeping nationalisation of industry.
The booklet was an attempt by Mr McDonnell, then on the backbenches, to scupper the coronation of Gordon Brown as
leader of the Labour Party and prime minister in 2007. Mr McDonnell attracted the
support of just 29 mps. A little over a decade
later, Mr Brown is long gone from politics.
New Labour is history. Mr McDonnell is
shadow chancellor and Jeremy Corbyn, his
friend and socialist ally, is leader. Labour
will campaign in Britain’s general election,
to be held on December 12th, on the most
left-wing platform in a generation.

The goal, according to Mr McDonnell, is
an “irreversible shift in wealth and power
in favour of working people”. If the party
were to be elected, even as a minority government, it could fundamentally reshape
the British economy, to a degree not seen
since Margaret Thatcher in the 1980s.
Now war is declared
For a start, the party pledges to end the Conservatives’ programme of ﬁscal austerity.
Reversing cuts to day-to-day department
spending since 2010 would cost some
£50bn ($64bn, or 2.4% of gdp). At least
£25bn a year would be put towards infrastructure investment, in part through the
creation of a “national investment bank”.
Water and energy ﬁrms would be brought
into public ownership. The Bank of England would be given a new mandate. The
state would forcibly transfer 10% of the
equity of large companies to their workers
and compel pharmaceutical ﬁrms to supply drugs cheaply. Private schools would be

The Economist November 2nd 2019

19

abolished. Britain’s working week could
fall from ﬁve days to four.
The prospect of a majority Labour government worries most economists. It is not
clear that Britain’s public ﬁnances are
strong enough to allow for a borrowing
binge, especially in the face of an ageing
population. A credible commitment from
the central bank to keep inﬂation under
control, and from the government to respect private-property rights, are the building blocks of a sustainable economy.
Britain is almost uniquely vulnerable to
a radical shift in policy. The country runs a
current-account deﬁcit of 5% of gdp, large
by rich-country standards, meaning that it
is highly reliant on inﬂows of foreign capital. Foreigners own a quarter of the outstanding stock of British government
bonds. Investors’ trust in the British government and the country’s institutions,
which rose during the 1990s (see chart 1, on
next page), has already been tested by the
ﬁnancial crisis, the Scottish independence
referendum of 2014 and Brexit. A loss of
faith would send the pound plunging, increase the cost of government borrowing
and imperil ﬁnancial stability.
In 2017 a partner at Goldman Sachs remarked, echoing the French President Emmanuel Macron’s quip over his predecessor’s 2012 campaign pledge to set a top
income-tax rate of 75%, that Britain under
Mr Corbyn would be like “Cuba without the 1

20

Brieﬁng Corbyn’s Labour Party

The Economist November 2nd 2019

2 sun.” Mr Corbyn then had a public battle

pared with most other countries, governments in Britain have unusual powers of
discretion to get things done without passing laws. No matter the makeup of Parliament after a general election, an incoming
Labour government could overhaul much
of the system—and do so fairly quickly.
Some of this could be for political gain;
an attempt to convince the British public
that it meant business. Labour could quickly launch pilot schemes on the pros and
cons of adopting a “universal basic income”. One Labour policy wonk impishly
suggests the incoming government could
follow the example of the Bolsheviks in 1917
and immediately publish highly sensitive
documents relating to previous governments—perhaps those related to the Iraq
war or the Troubles in Northern Ireland.
It could also pursue more substantive
policies. Take government spending. A recent report from the Hansard Society, a
think-tank, noted that Britain has “among
the weakest systems for parliamentary
control and inﬂuence over government expenditure in the developed world”. Mr McDonnell could boost spending on public
services at a stroke. He could go some way
towards creating a national investment
bank by boosting funding to the British
Business Bank, an existing programme
which directs investment to small ﬁrms.
He would need to seek parliamentary approval for such largesse at a later date. But
mps would have limited opportunities to
amend these plans, short of defunding the
entire government.
Without much diﬃculty, a Labour government could unilaterally raise the minimum wage (currently £8.21 for people aged
25 and over) to whatever level it deemed appropriate. It could also reduce the age at
which people are eligible to receive the top
rate, to 18. The roll-out of “universal credit”,
a hugely unpopular Conservative welfare
reform, could easily be halted. That would
come close to Mr McDonnell’s pledge to
“get rid of the bloody universal credit”.
Labour’s plans for the Bank of England
could also be implemented with little scru-

with Morgan Stanley, after the investment
bank warned of the dangers of a Labour
government. Yet some in the ﬁnancial establishment have started to look more favourably on the prospect, for two reasons.
The ﬁrst is Brexit. The Conservatives
have negotiated the hardest of hard-Brexit
deals, which the best estimates suggest will
cut incomes by 6% in the long run. That is
not much less of an impact than leaving the
eu with no deal at all. Labour, by contrast,
promises to hold a second referendum on
Brexit, with a freshly negotiated deal put
against staying in the eu altogether.
Second, the polls suggest that Labour
has little chance of forming a majority government (see chart 2). Most probably it
would have to rely on the Scottish National
Party (snp) or the Liberal Democrats, which
are likely to become the third- and fourthbiggest parties, respectively. In the company of more moderate parties, the argument goes that Labour would have little
chance of getting its most radical plans
through Parliament. That parliamentary
arithmetic, plus the checks and balances
on any British government, would thus
curb the instincts of a Corbyn government.
And battle come down
At a recent brieﬁng from a big investment
ﬁrm in London, managers insisted that
British assets were now cheap, on the
grounds that too many investors did not realise just how constrained Mr Corbyn
would be in practice. In September Citi, a
bank, suggested that a Corbyn government
would be “the more market-friendly election outcome” relative to no-deal under the
Conservatives, provided that Labour was in
an alliance with the snp and Liberal Democrats. Deutsche Bank has argued that while
“any market-unfriendly policies instigated
during a Labour government are temporary”, a no-deal Brexit would be a “permanent shock”.
Those analysts are making a mistake.
Without a majority, Labour would be constrained, but it would still be radical. Com-

2

Corb your enthusiasm
Election called

Britain, voting intention, by party*, %
2015 election

Brexit
referendum

95% conﬁdence interval

2017 election

Election called

Conservative

50
40
30

Labour

20
UKIP

Brexit Party

Liberal Democrat

Green

10
0

2015
Source: Politico Poll of Polls

16

17

18

19

*Excludes SNP and other parties that do not stand nationally

1

No longer the sick man of Europe
Difference in yields between British investment
abroad and foreign investment in Britain
% points*

1.0
↑
Britain safer

0.5
0
-0.5

Abroad safer
↓

-1.0
-1.5

1977

85

Source: ONS

90

95 2000 05

10

15 18

*Ten-year moving average

tiny. The wording of the Bank of England
Act 1998, which enshrines the operational
independence of the central bank, leaves
plenty of room for change. For a period of
three months the Treasury can take over
the management of monetary policy “...if
they are satisﬁed that the directions are required in the public interest and by extreme economic circumstances.”
The act also leaves the door open for
more permanent changes. The bank must
target “price stability”. Adding a target of
3% productivity growth does not appear to
ﬂatly contradict that requirement, especially as the next bit of the act states that
the bank must “support the economic policy of Her Majesty’s Government, including
its objectives for growth and employment”.
An incoming Labour government could
probably move the Bank of England from
London to Birmingham, as it has said it
would like to. Its time in government
would probably coincide with the opportunity to pick the next governor. Mark Carney, the incumbent, is leaving the post early next year. The Labour leadership is
thought to like Andy Haldane, the bank’s
chief economist, who has more left-leaning views on economic policy.
When it comes to the rest of the programme—including the sweeping nationalisations and the necessary tax increases—legislation would be required.
Moderate Labour mps and trade unions
might try and block some of these plans.
Mr Corbyn is a life-long critic of both nato
and nuclear weapons. However, unions
would hate to see the disappearance of
well-paid manufacturing jobs in the arms
industry; the party at large retains a militaristic streak. He has therefore pledged to
stay in the alliance and continue the renewal of Trident, Britain’s nuclear deterrent. While the country’s soft power could
shift, focusing on the pet causes of Mr Corbyn, its hard power would remain unchanged. Britain could be left looking like
an ngo with nukes.
But in the case of domestic economic
policy, mps outside Labour’s inner circle 1

22

Brieﬁng Corbyn’s Labour Party

2 would present less of a problem. Many

worry that wealth and income inequality in
Britain are too high, and are pleased that
someone at last seems to have the courage
to do something about it.
Relying on the mps of other parties is
more likely to gum up the process. The Liberal Democrats would be the trickier
partner. Its leader, Jo Swinson, has refused
any oﬃcial partnership with the Labour
Party. “We’re going to constrain Corbyn,”
says Sir Ed Davey, the party’s ﬁnance
spokesman. Any support for a Labour government would be both grudging and on a
case-by-case basis, particularly as the Liberal Democrat ranks have been bolstered by
former Labour mps such as Chuka
Umunna, who partly left the party because
they feared Mr Corbyn in Downing Street.
With a big ﬁnancial sector in Edinburgh, and a large oil-and-gas industry in
the North Sea, the snp might blanch at any
plans to curb banker bonuses or to make
life more diﬃcult for carbon-intensive
ﬁrms. Yet the party has drifted left in recent
years, shedding their reputation as “Tartan
Tories”. The snp is hoping to start its own
version of a national investment bank
north of the border; it has also raised income-tax rates and its water supply is already in public hands. Its real prize is holding another referendum on Scottish
independence, something for which Mr
Corbyn has recently voiced support. Backing the manifesto of a Labour government
is a small price to pay.
Meltdown expected
The legal system and the markets would
present further obstacles. In a series of lectures earlier this year Jonathan Sumption,
a former Supreme Court justice, complained that the law has come to play an
overbearing role in political life. Governments may decide they want to do something, but all sorts of legal institutions,
from the Supreme Court to the European
Court of Human Rights, constrain what is
possible. “There’s always someone judicially reviewing you,” huﬀs one former
Conservative chancellor, who, needless to
say, did not attempt to nationalise Britain’s
utilities during his time in oﬃce.
Legal questions dog Labour’s plans, particularly over policies such as nationalisation. The party insists that Parliament will
decide the appropriate price to pay shareholders in Royal Mail, the water companies, and electricity and gas networks. Labour also plays down the signiﬁcance of
forcibly transferring 10% of the value of
large companies to their workers. “That’s
not a levy,” Mr McDonnell told The Economist, with a grin. “That’s a sharing of the rewards of that particular company.”
Investors are unlikely to be so relaxed.
“The employee-ownership programme
proposed by Labour is nationalisation by

The Economist November 2nd 2019

the front door, back door and side door,” argues one chief executive of a ftse 250 ﬁrm.
His company would move to Ireland, and
would return only if the Conservatives got
into oﬃce, he claims.
If Labour tried to nationalise a company
without paying what would reasonably be
considered as fair market price, a court
challenge would follow. Britain has around
100 bilateral investment treaties (bits)
with other countries, designed with the express purpose of preventing expropriation.
Already, ﬁrms are shifting the holding
companies of their British assets to countries where a bit exists.
But the legal system would place only so
much of a constraint on Labour’s plans.
Though it would be expensive, and therefore win less public support, the party
could ward oﬀ legal challenges by oﬀering
a market price for the companies it wanted
to nationalise. Experts disagree over how
much that would cost—though the state
would be taking on extra debt, it would also
be acquiring an asset with a yield. A Labour
government could reduce its bill by talking
down the companies’ share prices (though
this might also face legal challenges). Already, the share prices of ﬁrms that Labour
has said it will acquire are underperforming the British stockmarket as a whole, according to analysis by The Economist.
Financial markets might present further problems. Most forecasters believe
that a Corbyn government would lead to a
depreciation of sterling of around 10%, as
well as higher borrowing costs for the government. Though the party promises a second referendum on Brexit, there is little
guarantee that it would campaign for Remain with much vigour (Mr Corbyn is a
lifelong Eurosceptic). It is even less certain
that, in a second referendum, the country
would vote the way that the markets want.
Many in the party would welcome a de-

preciation of sterling, on the grounds that
it would help Britain’s exporters. The eﬀect
of rising gilt yields would be felt over a
number of years, since the higher borrowing costs apply only to newly issued government debt. In any case, points out one
adviser to the Labour leadership, after
three years of the Brexit process Britons
have got used to the pound gyrating all over
the place. If market turmoil has not proved
to be the undoing of the government’s
Brexit strategy, then why should it prove to
be Labour’s downfall?
At some point, ructions in ﬁnancial
markets would force a change—a weak
pound makes imports more expensive,
trimming living standards. But that point
may be further away than many assume.
Older Corbynites shudder at the story of the
government of François Mitterrand,
France’s president from 1981 to 1995. It embarked on a solidly socialist programme
but embraced monetarism and budget cuts
as it sought to quell the markets and keep
the franc pegged to the Deutschmark.
Younger ones look with alarm at Syriza, the
far-left Greek party which capitulated to
the eu after coming to oﬃce in 2015.
Would something similar happen with
Labour? Some insiders think that policies
such as the employee-ownership fund will
be watered down. One Labour politician
has been heard to complain that Mr McDonnell has “become like a bloody bank
manager these days”.
But those in the inner circle claim to be
steely. Seumas Milne, an adviser to Mr Corbyn, co-wrote an academic article in 1994
which excoriated Mitterrand for selling
out. In “People Get Ready: Preparing for a
Corbyn Government”, a book published
earlier this year, Christine Berry and Joe
Guinan, two researchers who are close to
Labour, implore the leadership to resist the
power of international ﬁnanciers, even if
they accept that what they call a “siege
economy” is “not particularly desirable as a
long-term solution”.
Another possibility exists. Even as a Labour government appears to compromise,
it could remain radical. It is promising so
many things to its potential voters that it
does not much matter if it has to bargain
some of them away. At the end of ﬁve years,
Britain’s ﬁscal and monetary policy could
be turned upside down. Investors may
have reassessed their view of the country.
Nor is Labour’s leftward turn likely to be
a passing phase. At 70 years old, Mr Corbyn
is likely to step down after the election
should he fail to win. Those around him are
already jostling to take over. Few are lurching to the right in anticipation—the party
members, who elect the leader, are Corbynites through and through. Another world
has already arrived for Labour. Mr Corbyn
and Mr McDonnell will hope another world
is still possible for Britain. 7

United States

The Economist November 2nd 2019

23

Also in this section
24 Southern governors’ races
26 An electoral legacy of Jim Crow
26 The Russia inquiry
28 A vote on genocide
29 Lexington: Presidents and baseball

The economy

Easy now

WA S H I N GTO N , D C

America’s economy is resisting the pull of recession

T

his was not the way it was supposed to
go. “Four, ﬁve and maybe even six percent” growth was what President Donald
Trump promised in December 2017. Even
within the relatively sober pages of the
budget proposal released by the administration in March this year, Mr Trump’s team
forecast economic growth rates of 3% or
more right through to 2024—which would
be the last full year of a second Trump term,
were one to occur. Instead, the American
economy, which just missed the 3% growth
target in 2018 despite the boost from the
president’s budget-busting tax bill, continues to lose steam. In the third quarter of
this year gdp, adjusted for inﬂation, rose at
an annualised rate of 1.9%, down from 2%
in the previous three months. The question
hanging over Mr Trump, and millions of
American workers, is just how far the slowdown will run and how deep it will go.
The ﬁrst signs of trouble for America’s
economy appeared in late 2018. Housing
construction slumped as higher mortgage
rates (pushed upward by Federal Reserve
interest-rate hikes) combined with rising
home prices to drive buyers from the mar-

ket. At the same time, a global slowdown in
manufacturing and trade weighed on
American producers. New manufacturing
orders dropped fairly steadily from September 2018 until May this year, and parts
of America’s manufacturing heartland experienced declines in factory employment.
Economy-watchers have waited anxiously
in the months since to see whether weakness in industry and construction would
bleed into the service sector, where most
Americans work.
Mounting anxiety eventually roused
the Fed to action. The central bank spent
most of 2018 raising its benchmark interest
rates in order to keep inﬂation in check, despite some withering criticism emanating
from the president’s Twitter account. As
the world economy sputtered, the Fed
slowly changed course: ﬁrst halting its cycle of increasing rates, then cutting them
by 0.25% in both July and September this
year. Jerome Powell, the Fed’s chairman,
insisted that the moves represented a
“mid-cycle adjustment”, lest markets read
the cuts as a sign that the end of America’s
longest expansion on record was nigh.

The cuts appear to have helped. Mortgage rates have retreated; the average rate
on 30-year loans, which rose to nearly 5% a
year ago, has dropped back to 3.75%. That
has put a bit of wind back in the sails of the
residential construction industry, which
began work on about 20,000 more homes
in September than in the same month last
year. Residential investment contributed
positively to gdp growth in the third quarter, the ﬁrst time it had done so in nearly
two years.
Rate cuts also seem to have switched oﬀ
the bright, blinking recession-warning
light which is the “yield curve”. “Inversions” of the yield curve, which occur when
rates on long-term government bonds fall
below those on short-term government
debt, frequently appear a year or so before
the onset of recession. The curve inverted
over the summer, fuelling recession worries, but has since ﬂipped back. Stock
prices, which looked sickly in May, have
roared back to touch record highs, buoyed
by better-than-expected earnings reports
as well as the prospect of a trade truce between America and China.
On October 30th the Fed reduced its
benchmark rate once more, by another
0.25%. But in doing so it very nearly declared victory in the battle to ward oﬀ a
downturn. Markets now expect the Fed to
hold its ground for at least the next six
months. Mr Powell, while emphasising
that the Fed will be watching the data closely, said, “We see the current stance of monetary policy as likely to remain appropri- 1

24

United States

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Slump over?
United States, contributions to GDP growth
Percentage points, annualised rate
Personal consumption
Gross investment

Government spending
Net exports
4

Net
growth

2
0
-2
2017

2018

Q1

Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis

Q2

Q3

2019

2 ate...We believe monetary policy is in a

good place.” A majority of members of the
rate-setting committee reckon the Fed
should resume rate increases in 2020.
The Fed’s conﬁdence, if understandable, may be premature. The conditions
weighing on the economy earlier in the
year have eased a little, but the growth
scare did its damage. Consumers have been
the ones driving the economy forward.
They continue to spend, but with less gusto
than before. Personal consumption spending grew at a 2.9% annual pace in the third
quarter: not bad, but down from 4.6% in
the second. Retail sales in September
dropped by 0.3%, suggesting that the quarter ended on a weak note. Measures of consumer conﬁdence—a guide to how spending may evolve in future—have slipped.
Firms, too, are behaving cautiously.
Measures of business conﬁdence have
been softening. Anxiety among bosses is
aﬀecting investment: the boost to thirdquarter gdp from investment in housing
was more than oﬀset by a hefty drop in investment in non-residential building and
equipment. Weak investment ﬁgures are
particularly irksome to economists in the
Trump administration, who argued that
the president’s tax reform would encourage a boom in business spending. Business
enthusiasm could recover a bit in the
months to come, if indeed a trade-war
ceaseﬁre is declared. But the trade war is
only partly responsible for ﬁrms’ woes.
More important is the worldwide slowdown. Both Europe and Japan have slipped
close to the brink of recession, and the deceleration in Chinese growth shows few
signs of abating. A turnaround in American
economic fortunes, if it occurs, will begin
with homegrown optimism.
Hopes for that hinge in turn on the
health of the labour market. The jobs picture has been the most enduring source of
encouragement to those looking on the
bright side. The pace of hiring has slowed;
payrolls have risen by 1.4% over the past 12
months, down from 1.8% over the year be-

fore that. But that is not an unexpected development this deep into an economic expansion, when fewer jobless workers
remain to be hired. The unemployment
rate, at 3.5%, remains extraordinarily low.
So long as ﬁrms continue to hire and wages
to grow, consumers are likely to keep
spending at rates suﬃcient to steer the
economy clear of a downturn.
Given the uncertainty surrounding the
path of the economy, the Fed might have
been expected to signal its readiness to
keep cutting rates, if necessary, more clearly. Conﬁdence is easier to maintain than to
restore, and the risks of a surge in inﬂation
have fallen in recent months. The price index for personal consumption expenditures, the Fed’s preferred inﬂation measure, rose at a 1.5% annual pace in the third
quarter, below the Fed’s 2% target and
down from 2.4% in the second. Instead, the
central bank seems content to wait and see
how conditions develop—and to allow a
president facing threats from all sides to
twist in the wind. 7
Louisiana and Mississippi

Democrats in Dixie
B ATO N R O U G E A N D J A CKS O N

Governors’ races in two deep-southern
states have national implications

T

he twin races for the governorships of
Mississippi (on November 5th) and
Louisiana (on the 16th) will show whether,
as a former House Speaker once said, “all
politics is local”, or whether, in the days of
Donald Trump, national partisanship supersedes everything and even local politics
are not local any more. At stake is whether
conservative Democrats can win statewide
oﬃce in the Deep South.
Traditionally, southern voters have regarded governors diﬀerently from the oﬃcers they send to Washington. Senators or
congressional representatives are judged
on their party, and Republicans have swept
the South. But governors have been seen as
local problem-solvers. They were judged
on their personalities, and sometimes on
links to powerful local families. In both
states, Democrats this year are putting up
the kind of person who has usually held his
own in the South.
John Bel Edwards is a Catholic who has
signed one of the country’s toughest antiabortion laws, has a military background
and is a defender of gun rights. As the incumbent in Louisiana, he is the only governor from his party in the South. For a
Democrat in a Republican state, he is remarkably popular, with a net favourability
rating of 18 (50% approve, 32% disapprove).

He has stabilised the state’s shaky ﬁnances
and introduced criminal-justice reforms
which mean Louisiana is no longer the
state with the highest incarceration rate.
In Mississippi, Jim Hood is the only
Democrat holding statewide oﬃce, having
been elected attorney-general four times.
The incumbent (Republican) governor is
term-limited, so this race is open. Mr Hood
has proposed an expansion of Medicaid
and increased funding for the state’s roads.
But he also looks like a much-loved Mississippi-born country-music singer, Conway
Twitty. He and Mr Edwards are the inverse
of “Republicans in name only”. They are
Republicans in all but name.
Yet even in Louisiana—with its Frenchinﬂuenced legal system, 2m alligators and
unique Caribbean-French-Creole-Catholic-Cajun culture—the nationalisation of
politics is changing the political rules. On
October 12th the state held its “jungle primary”, in which all candidates for oﬃce regardless of party were on the ballot and
those who got 50% were elected without
having to go through a second round. Mr
Edwards’s vote soared in areas around cities (New Orleans, Baton Rouge) and
crashed in the rural rest of the state. As a result, he narrowly missed the magic 50%.
Kyle Kondik, a political analyst at the University of Virginia, argues that this reﬂects
a national trend: “White, rural areas with
little college education are shifting to Republicans. Suburban areas with more college graduates are shifting to Democrats.”
Mr Trump is doing his best to consolidate this national trend. On the eve of the
primary he held a big rally in Louisiana to
turn out the white working-class vote, to
great eﬀect. In Louisiana the Republican
candidate is a construction magnate and
self-styled “conservative outsider” called
Eddie Rispone who models himself on the
president. He won the nomination by criti- 1

Decision time in the Deep South

26

United States

The Economist November 2nd 2019

2 cising his rival as inadequately Trumpist

and says he will “do to Louisiana what
Trump has done to America”.
If Mississippi and Louisiana are politically distinctive it may be because they exaggerate national trends, rather than contradict them. They are the two states with
the highest proportion of African-American voters; these are solidly Democratic.
They have an unusually high proportion of
white working-class and rural voters; these
are reliably Republican. As a result, say
Nate Silver and Nathaniel Rakich of FiveThirtyEight, a statistical website, the two
states have among the least “elastic” electorates in the country: their voters are
among the least likely to change their
minds. Moreover, thanks to the second
group, Mr Trump is even more popular in
the two states than might be expected.
Messrs Silver and Rakich calculate states’
“Republican lean” based on polls and the
party’s performance over previous cycles.
Compared with this baseline, Mr Trump is
more popular in Mississippi and Louisiana

Y’all ready for this?
United States, governor elections
Voting intention, %
Louisiana*

0

10

20

30

40

50

John Bel Edwards (D)
Eddie Rispone (R)
Mississippi†
Tate Reeves (R)
Jim Hood (D)
Sources: JMC Analytics;
Mason-Dixon

*Oct 24th-26th 2019
†Oct 17th-19th 2019

than in any other Republican states.
If they are indeed characteristic of the
nation, that may not bode well for Democrats in Republican states. In Louisiana’s
jungle primary, Republicans enjoyed a
landslide. Five of seven statewide oﬃcers
from the party won in the ﬁrst round. Republicans won a supermajority in the state
Senate. Republicans in Mississippi also
think they can increase their share in the

Mississippi

Loser take all
J A CKS O N

state House to two-thirds.
Such majorities could enable ruling Republicans to overturn a governor’s veto.
That matters because 2020 is a census year,
and after each census the state legislature
must draw new redistricting (voting-area)
maps to reﬂect population shifts. In practice, Republican-controlled houses with
supermajorities could redraw voting maps
to hurt Democrats, without fear of a Democratic governor’s veto.
None of this means a Democrat cannot
win in the Deep South. Mr Edwards fell
short in the primary mainly because of low
turnout among African-American voters.
Their numbers usually rise in the second
round. That, plus votes from some disaffected anti-Rispone Republicans, would be
enough for him. Mr Hood’s climb is steeper
because the Republican is ahead in the
polls and because of Mississippi’s constitution (see box). The two men’s diﬃculties
show how hard it is for centrists to win in
states where politics is less and less local,
even at a local level. 7
The Russia inquiry

In search of lost
crime

Jim Crow still haunts the Magnolia State’s politics

T

he governor’s race in Mississippi is
a reminder that America has strange,
little-known election rules which can
profoundly aﬀect results. This one could
mean the candidate with fewer votes gets
chosen for the state’s highest oﬃce
under a system that could be rejected by
the Supreme Court.
Under Mississippi’s constitution,
statewide oﬃcers must win a majority of
the popular vote and a majority of the 122
districts comprising the state’s House of
Representatives. If no one wins a doublemajority, the House may choose the
governor. This provision’s aim was overtly racist. According to a record of the
state’s constitutional convention, which
was held in 1890 at the start of the Jim
Crow era, the framers declared: “It is the
manifest intention of this convention to
secure to the state of Mississippi ‘white
supremacy’.” By crowding blacks into a
few districts (and denying them the
vote), the framers ensured that whites
could never be outvoted.
The law now discriminates against
Democrats, the political party for whom
African-Americans overwhelmingly
vote. In practice, Democrats need to win
at least 55% of the popular vote to win a
majority of districts.
Other states once had similar provisions. In Georgia candidates had to win a
weighted majority of counties. That was

struck down by the Supreme Court in
1963, ruling that it oﬀended against the
principle of one person-one vote. The
surprise is that Mississippi’s law has
survived so long.
In May the National Redistricting
Foundation, headed by Eric Holder,
President Obama’s attorney-general, and
the Mississippi Centre for Justice, a legal
group, ﬁled suit in district court, claiming the constitution discriminates
against African-Americans. In hearings
in October the judge was sympathetic to
the argument but wary of changing
election law on the eve of a vote. However he rules, the provision is likely to
continue in force, since the losing side
will appeal and the case could make its
way to the Supreme Court.
That could have immediate consequences. The race for governor is tight.
The Republican is ahead but Jim Hood,
the Democratic candidate, could win the
popular vote though not a majority of
districts. In other races when this happened, either the losing candidate conceded before the House got involved or
the leading candidate was from its majority party, which selected him. This
time, the Republican candidate, Tate
Reeves, has refused to rule out letting the
House decide. The candidate with the
most votes could lose the election. Hardly a popular mandate.

WA S H I N GTO N , D C

The Justice Department opens a
criminal investigation into itself

T

estifying earlier this year before the
Senate Appropriations Committee,
William Barr, Donald Trump’s attorneygeneral, said, “I think spying did occur”
against Mr Trump’s campaign in 2016. That
is an odd way to characterise the fbi-led investigation into Russian interference,
which began not with surveillance, but
with a tip from Australia’s government—
that Russia had oﬀered “dirt” on Hillary
Clinton’s campaign. But it delighted Mr
Trump, who has long blamed his woes on a
“deep state” conspiracy. Mr Barr recently
gave the president another reason to smile,
as news leaked that the Justice Department
(doj) had opened a criminal inquiry into
the origins of the Russia investigation.
That has left many in Washington confused. On one hand, the attorney whom Mr
Barr has put in charge of the investigation—John Durham, the chief federal prosecutor in Connecticut—is respected across
the political spectrum for his apolitical
thoroughness as well as his probity. A
criminal inquiry gives him the power to
subpoena witnesses, empanel grand juries
and bring indictments.
On the other, investigations into possible malfeasance within an agency are usually carried out by the agency’s inspector
general (ig). Indeed, the doj ig’s oﬃce was 1

28

United States

The Economist November 2nd 2019

US-Turkish relations

A long march
The House votes to recognise the persecution of Armenians as genocide

F

Who wants an investigation?
2 already looking into roughly the same

thing (possible surveillance abuses by the
doj and fbi against the Trump campaign)
and is expected to issue a full report soon.
How that inquiry ﬁts with Mr Durham’s is
unclear. Michael Horowitz, the ig, has admitted to “hav[ing] had communications”
with Mr Durham, which is unusual, because ig’s oﬃces tend to operate independently from their agencies.
Mr Barr has taken an active role in this
investigation. He accompanied Mr Durham to Rome in late September, where they
reportedly received a taped deposition
from Joseph Mifsud, a Maltese professor
who in April 2016 told George Papadopoulos, a low-level foreign-policy aide to the
Trump campaign, that Russia had Mrs
Clinton’s stolen emails. (Mr Mifsud has
since gone to ground.) Attorneys-general
do not do that sort of thing. As one former
federal prosecutor put it, “that’s what
agents are for.”
What Mr Durham is investigating remains unclear. After saying he thought the
Trump campaign was spied on, Mr Barr
said he wanted to “explore” whether the
surveillance was justiﬁed. But criminal inquiries tend to require better grounding
than this. Perhaps Mr Durham or Mr Horowitz has found evidence of illegal activity;
if so, they have said nothing.
Opening a criminal investigation into
people Mr Trump has cast as his political
enemies—but who appear to have followed
genuine leads and uncovered evidence of
Russian electoral interference that has led
to dozens of indictments and several convictions—could signal a worrying erosion
of the doj’s independence. Mr Barr, who
has been a longtime proponent of executive power, may believe that independence
only extends as far as the president allows.

or armenian-americans, it was a
moment of vindication. After decades
of campaigning for their country to
acknowledge their forebears’ agonies,
news came that the House of Representatives had voted by 405 to 11 to recognise as genocide the persecution of the
Armenians launched by the Ottoman
empire in 1915. “I’m so happy, I can’t get
over it,” said Aram Garabedian, an 84year-old activist from Rhode island.
Since at least the 1970s, Congressional
battles over how to characterise the
Armenians’ suﬀering have been a perennial feature of American politics. The
House passed a similar resolution in 1984
but successive administrations have
laboured to dissuade legislators from
using the g-word for fear of alienating
Turkey, an American strategic partner.
Yet when relations with Turkey are at
a low ebb because of its incursion into
Syria, the energy needed to push back
seems to have sapped. House Resolution
296 asserted that America had already,
through a series of oﬃcially supported
gestures and initiatives over the past
century, recognised the genocidal nature
of the Ottoman Turkish actions.
What is not in doubt is that in spring
1915, as they were locked in war with
Britain, France and Russia, the Ottoman
authorities ordered the relocation of
hundreds of thousands of Armenians in
conditions that many were doomed not
to survive. Some victims were killed by
Turkish and Kurdish armed bands while
some perished as they were marched in
horriﬁc conditions.
Most historians of mass killing, including the International Association of
Genocide Scholars, agreed that this
episode amply meets the criterion laid
down by the un convention on genocide

But such a position, as Jerry Nadler and
Adam Schiﬀ, Democratic congressmen
leading the impeachment inquiry, agreed
in a joint statement, risks making the doj
into “a vehicle for President Trump’s political revenge” and doing “irreparable damage” to the rule of law.
The impeachment inquiry, of course, is
still in early days. And the doj investigation may yield indictments. Even if it does
not, it gives Republicans something other
than impeachment to talk about. It blunts
charges of corruption and self-dealing
hurled at Mr Trump, and validates to him
and his supporters his feelings of persecu-

of 1948. This deﬁnes the ultimate crime
as “acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national,
ethnical, racial or religious group”
whether through outright killing of
“inﬂicting…conditions of life” designed
to bring about their destruction.
Some Western governments share the
oﬃcial Turkish view that the intention to
bring about death on a huge scale remains unproven, or that the context of
terrible suﬀering on all sides should be
factored in. Turkish President Recep
Tayyip Erdogan denounced the vote as
the “biggest insult” to his people.
In the short term, the vote looks very
likely to play into Mr Erdogan’s hands, as
he drums up defensive feelings among
his compatriots and stokes their suspicion of a Western world whose intentions, he says, have always been malign.
“This is a resolution which is doomed to
be misused,” predicted Brady Kiesling, a
former American diplomat who has
served in Armenia.

Painful memories in Yerevan

tion. In 2016 Hillary Clinton’s polling lead
plummeted following an announcement,
11 days before the election, that the fbi had
reopened an investigation into her emails.
Mr Trump wanted Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, “in a public box,” announcing an investigation of Joe Biden, a
potential rival for the presidency.
And it may last a while. A former federal
prosecutor praised Mr Durham for being
“very methodical, [meaning] slow.” His inquiry could drag on well into next year, letting Mr Trump contend from the hustings
that he is investigating the “deep state” and
needs one more term to defeat it. 7

The Economist November 2nd 2019

United States

Lexington Take me out of this ball game

Donald Trump’s embarrassing reception at the World Series was a deﬁning moment of his presidency

A

s a rule of thumb, the more an American president is loved,
the more baseball stories there are about him. Many are even
true. George Washington was recorded playing wicket—a rival
game—at Valley Forge. Dwight Eisenhower claimed to have played
semi-pro under a fake name. When commentating on the Chicago
Cubs for a radio station in Iowa, Ronald Reagan invented foul balls
to ﬁll the gaps when his live feed failed. But Abraham Lincoln did
not, as alleged, whisper on his deathbed to Abner Doubleday,
“Keep baseball going; the country needs it.” Lincoln never regained
consciousness after being shot. And Doubleday—who was not
baseball’s inventor, contrary to another myth—was not with him.
The profusion of such stories illustrates the national pastime’s
place in the culture. Baseball is an institution as American as the
presidency itself. It also reﬂects politicians’ inability to keep away
from a popular game. Even Theodore Roosevelt, who despised
baseball, felt unable to say so publicly. And every subsequent president bar one has marked the start of the baseball season or its epic
denouement, the World Series, by throwing a ceremonial “ﬁrst
pitch”—starting with William Howard Taft, a huge fan in every
sense. (Though he did not, as many claim, invent the “seventh-inning stretch” by unfurling his cramped limbs while watching the
Washington Senators.) The sole exception is Donald Trump.
He had not been to watch the Washington Nationals (the Senators’ successors) before this week. And though he was persuaded
to go because the “Nats” were appearing in their ﬁrst World Series,
he was not invited to throw the ﬁrst pitch. On what he might have
expected to be his best day as commander-in-chief (he revealed
the killing of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi hours earlier), he was hidden
away in an executive suite. The Lerner family that owns the Nats
did not want him sitting with them. And the one time he ﬂashed
up on the big screen the jeering of the crowd was thunderous. A
chant of “Lock him up!” rippled round the stadium long after Mr
Trump’s image was replaced by footage of smiling servicemen.
“Veterans for impeachment” read a banner behind home plate.
Mr Trump’s Republican defenders dismissed this indignity as
mere swamp gurgling. “You can either be loved in dc and hated in
America. Or you can be loved in America and hated in dc,” tweeted
Congressman Jody Hice. But it signiﬁed much worse for the presi-

dent and his party than a few thousand hostile bureaucrats.
Mr Trump might face a similar reception in any of the 30 majorleague stadiums. All are in big cities, with well-educated, go-getting, diverse populations, where he is loathed. Even Houston,
home of the Nationals’ opponents and the biggest city in a state
synonymous with conservatism, is now largely Democratic. And
Washington is a more typical metropolis than Mr Hice (who also
considers abortion “much worse than Hitler’s 6m Jews”) would
care to recognise. Its victorious baseball team illustrates this.
“First in war, ﬁrst in peace, and last in the American League,”
went the old joke about baseball in the capital. Washington’s black
population was long considered too poor and its white one,
dominated by federal-government workers, too transient to support a major-league team. Before the Nationals arrived in 2005 the
city had not had one for 33 years. But a booming, increasingly diversiﬁed economy has since transformed the capital. Its population, in decline for half a century, has grown rapidly. Its row houses
have been taken over by yuppies; its cultural and nightlife scenes
are thriving. And the Nats, who draw over 2m spectators a year, illustrated that change even before their stunning triumph in the
World Series this week made them emblematic of it.
“I’d lived in dc for 20 years before the Nationals arrived, but
only then did it become my city,” said Paul Rosenzweig, a conservative lawyer and native New Yorker, from his perch behind rightﬁeld. Baseball’s deep history, above all its association with a capacious national identity encompassing racial and political divisions, make it a powerful force for civic attachment. This was
apparent in the way Washingtonians went gaga for the game as
soon as their team began inching to its World Series victory a
month ago. Nats shirts and ﬂags have been everywhere; Dominican food, their bilingual team’s favourite, is all the rage. America’s
capital has found in baseball a way to celebrate and advertise its reemergence. Mr Trump was not jeered by a bunch of federal penpushers so much as by representatives of the conﬁdent metropolitan America—which produces most of its wealth and will increasingly deﬁne its future—he has turned his party against.
The wisdom of the crowd
He is not the ﬁrst president to be booed at a sporting event. Bill
Clinton was jeered by a nascar crowd, George W. Bush and Barack
Obama at baseball games. But veterans of those occasions (and
there were several watching the Nats that night) considered the
hatefulness of the response to Mr Trump qualitatively diﬀerent.
This should make conservatives even more worried. For years they
have exaggerated the vindictiveness and radicalism of the left to
mask the contradictions in their own camp. Yet Mr Trump’s divisiveness has turned this into a self-fulﬁlling prophecy. Charged
with partisan grievance, many on the left want to scrap the electoral college, pack the courts—do whatever it takes to never again be
tyrannised by an antediluvian minority. Conservatives may soon
have more than the odd gay wedding cake to contend with.
And it already seems certain that the one baseball event Mr
Trump will be associated with occurred at Nationals Park this
week. Sport lifts people with a feeling of vicarious striving for perfection even when their team loses. And when it wins, as the Nationals ultimately did, bringing Washington its ﬁrst World Series
in almost a century, the memory never fades. This is why sport is so
much more loved than politics. Immortalised in baseball history,
Mr Trump’s humiliation this week will be remembered long after
most of his administration’s scandals have faded into oblivion. 7

29

30

The Americas

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Argentina

Rolling back the years
BUENOS AIRES

Alberto Fernández, the newly elected president, will struggle to clean up the mess
his Peronist movement made

“W

e will devote all our eﬀorts to
ending the suﬀering of all Argentines,” declared Alberto Fernández, Argentina’s president-elect, before a crowd in
Chacarita, a working-class area of Buenos
Aires. Mr Fernández was celebrating his
victory over the incumbent, Mauricio Macri, in a presidential election on October
27th. But Mr Macri raised similar hopes
after his election four years ago, which
ended 14 years of rule by the Peronist movement to which Mr Fernández belongs.
The victory by the Peronists—who secured 48% of the vote against Mr Macri’s
40% with most of the votes counted—was
narrower than expected but large enough
to avoid a run-oﬀ vote in December. The
question is whether they can do a better job
of resolving the country’s chronic economic troubles than Mr Macri did.
The election oﬀered voters a choice between two failed models. Mr Macri’s supposedly business-friendly presidency is
ending with a shrinking economy, a falling
currency and rising prices. But the years of
populist rule by the Peronists that preced-

ed it were at least as bad. The author of the
previous Peronist disaster, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner (no relation to Mr Fernández), will now be vice-president. When
it became clear after a primary vote in August that the Fernández duo would win, the
peso plunged by 25% and inﬂation surged. Even as the winners were chalking up
the votes on October 27th, shopkeepers
were marking up prices, anticipating further devaluation and higher inﬂation.
Nerves have since settled. The peso
strengthened a bit against the dollar in the
black market in the days following the election. Mr Macri, conceding defeat, invited
the president-elect immediately to the
Casa Rosada, the presidential palace. The
hope is that the two can agree a “transition
package” to keep the markets steady until
Mr Fernández takes oﬃce in December.
Also in this section
31 The unrest in Chile
32 Bello: Venezuela’s threat to Colombia

They have already signed oﬀ on tighter currency controls, limiting dollar purchases
to just $200 a month, to prevent a possible
run on the peso. That is much lower than
the $10,000 limit imposed in September.
The election did not resolve the question of which Fernández would truly succeed Mr Macri: Alberto, the presidentelect, or Cristina, the charismatic former
president who elevated Alberto from backstage operative to presidential frontman.
The early signs are mixed. In the closing
days of the campaign, Mr Fernández insisted he and his running-mate were inseparable. “But that was the candidate speaking,”
said one of his inner circle, as the president-elect celebrated his victory. “He
knows he has to cut the cord if he is to stabilise this economy, and win time for recovery from this economic mess.” Mr Fernández has already signalled that he will
seek a pact with businesses and unions to
contain inﬂation. Entrepreneurs sound receptive. “Count on me, especially when it
comes to a social pact,” said one of Argentina’s biggest soya farmers, Gustavo Grobocopatel, who had backed Mr Macri.
One clue to Mr Fernández’s intentions
will be his choice of treasury minister. The
two leading candidates, Matías Kulfas and
Guillermo Nielsen, are veterans of the
Kirchners’ rule (and members of Mr Fernández’s transition team). But their reputations diﬀer. Mr Nielsen has encouraged
bondholders and the imf to show patience
with the new government. He cites the ex- 1

The Economist November 2nd 2019
2 ample of Uruguay, which repaid its credi-

tors after a crisis in 2002 slowly, but without subjecting them to a “haircut”. That
may not work in Argentina given the size of
its debts (near 90% of gdp, according to
jpmorgan Chase) and its weak currency.
But investors welcome the sentiment.
Mr Nielsen, who led Argentina’s negotiations with the imf from 2003 to 2005, may
reprise that role as Argentina seeks to revise the terms of its existing $57bn loan
from the fund. That may make Mr Kulfas, a
general manager of the central bank during
Ms Fernández’s presidency, the favourite
for the top economic job. He is viewed as a
traditional Peronist in his economic thinking. “So expect protectionism, interventionism, strict currency controls to limit
capital ﬂight,” said a former senior oﬃcial.
A big job for Cecilia Todesca, a moderate
who served alongside Mr Kulfas at the central bank, would be a reassuring signal.
Other election results will have a bearing on the struggle for power within the Peronist government. The province of Buenos Aires, home to almost 40% of
Argentina’s population, elected Axel Kicillof as governor. A former economy minister
under Ms Fernández, he will have an inﬂuential voice. And it is not an entirely reassuring one. “The economic situation we inherit today represents scorched earth, the
ultimate failure of neoliberalism,” Mr Kicillof declared at the Peronists’ victory celebration.
Even so, other results suggest those
scorching “neoliberals” may have a say in
how Argentina is governed. A member of
Mr Macri’s party won re-election as mayor
of the city of Buenos Aires by a huge margin. Mr Macri’s coalition looks likely to
form the largest group in the lower house
of congress (although Mr Fernández’s alliance will control the senate).
“The good news is we have two broadly
based coalitions coming out of this,” concluded Sergio Berensztein, a political analyst. The Peronists will have to seek allies
rather than berate their enemies. With
luck, Mr Macri will have left a political legacy of “conversation, not conﬂict”.
Mr Fernández’s foreign policy may be
more ideological than his economic policy.
His ﬁrst foreign trip as president-elect will
be to visit Mexico’s populist president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador. Relations with
Brazil, Argentina’s biggest neighbour, are
oﬀ to a frosty start. Jair Bolsonaro, Brazil’s
right-wing president, refused to congratulate him on his election victory.
“All I care about is that the Peronists and
Cristina will look after us once again,” said
Marta Moreno, a housewife at Mr Fernández’s victory rally. The poster in her hand
recalled an election victory of 73 years ago.
It bore the image of Eva Perón, General Juan
Perón’s wife, who is still popular with those
who want leaders to look after them. 7

The Americas
Chile

Piñera’s pickle
SANTIAGO

The president tries to set a new
direction. The country may not follow

T

he protests that have convulsed Chile
have taken every conceivable form.
They began when students in Santiago, the
capital, started dodging metro fares, which
had been raised by 30 pesos (four cents) at
peak times to 830 pesos. Anger then began
to express itself in arson and looting and
spread to other cities. The government imposed its ﬁrst curfew in Santiago since the
end of dictatorship in 1990. At least 20 people died in the unrest and more than 1,000
have been injured.
On October 25th 1.2m people, a ﬁfth of
the city’s population, converged on central
Santiago to express (peacefully) their disgust with inequality and with the way the
country is run. “I would like to retire but
can’t,” said Carolina, a 62-year-old teacher,
who has saved enough for a pension of just
$275 a month after 30 years on the job. Placards demanded everything from a lower
vat on books to a new constitution.
Sebastián Piñera, Chile’s centre-right
president, at ﬁrst took a tough line with the
malcontents. “We are at war,” he declared
during the rioting. The state’s response was
heavy-handed. Although most of the
deaths occurred because of arson, Chile’s
Human Rights Institute is compiling evidence of 120 cases of abuse by security
forces, including ﬁve killings.
As protests grew, Mr Piñera’s tone

Marching for more

31

changed. On October 19th he rolled back the
fare increase. On October 22nd he announced further concessions. These included higher public spending on pensions and health care, a boost to the
minimum wage and a reversal of recent
rises in electricity prices. These measures
will cost the government $1.2bn, 0.4% of
gdp. To help pay for this the government is
to raise taxes on top earners.
Mr Piñera followed that up on October
28th by replacing eight members of his cabinet. The new cabinet has a younger,
friendlier face. The president, who promised “better times” when he took oﬃce in
2018, says these changes herald the start of
“new times”. But it is unclear how much
novelty he is planning, and whether it will
satisfy Chile’s restive people.
Violence has lessened, but continues.
Some protesters are demanding Mr Piñera’s resignation. On October 30th he announced that two high-proﬁle international meetings, a un climate conference and a
summit of Asian and Paciﬁc countries, will
not be held in Santiago. He wants to focus
on restoring order and talking to Chileans.
If Mr Piñera is to deal with the roots of
discontent, he will have to reform Chile’s
way of providing health care, education
and pensions, believes Eugenio Tironi, a
sociologist. Under a model developed by
free-market economists during the dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet, who ruled
from 1973 to 1990, citizens are expected to
save for their own retirement.
In many other countries, public pensions are ﬁnanced by taxing current workers and giving the money to current pensioners—a system that comes under strain
when the population ages. Chileans, by
contrast, invest the money they save in privately managed funds. This system has
helped Chile manage its public ﬁnances
and encouraged the development of longterm capital markets, which in turn has
boosted economic growth. But Chileans
like Carolina are furious to discover that
they have not contributed enough money
to pay for adequate pensions. Many are
equally angry about long waiting times to
see doctors in the public health system and
about the lousy education available in public schools.
Post-dictatorship governments have
tried to boost public spending on the
hard-up. In 2008, for example, the Socialist
government of Michelle Bachelet increased the value of payments to schools
attended by the children of poor families.
But even after such changes the government spends less than 11% of gdp on education, health and pensions, well below the
average of the oecd, a club of mainly rich
countries, to which Chile belongs.
The conservative Mr Piñera is unlikely
to scrap a system which in many ways has
served Chile well. It is the second-richest 1

32

The Americas

2 country in Latin America, thanks in part to

its healthy public ﬁnances and robust private sector. Mr Piñera is likely to resist demands for a constituent assembly to rewrite the constitution. This might push
reform in the direction of populism and
discourage investment.
One problem for the government is that
the protesters’ demands are unclear. Their
movement grew largely through social media, without identiﬁable leaders. Another
problem is that Chile’s political class has
lost credibility. A survey conducted in May
this year by cerc-Mori, a pollster, found

The Economist November 2nd 2019

that the senate, the chamber of deputies
and political parties were among the country’s four least-trusted institutions. (The
fourth was the pension-fund managers.)
Mr Piñera’s own approval rating
dropped last week from 29% to 14%, an alltime low for a president in the democratic
era, according to Cadem, another pollster.
A rich businessman, he is seen as an exemplar of what is wrong with Chile. His coalition, Chile Vamos, has a minority of
seats in congress, which has made it hard
for him to govern. Anger over humanrights abuses may further complicate his

eﬀorts to introduce reforms.
Mr Piñera wants to overcome such obstacles by convening town-hall meetings
similar to those held by France’s president,
Emmanuel Macron, in response to the gilets jaunes (yellow jackets) protests this
year. These could help, says Juan Pablo
Luna, a political scientist at the Catholic
University in Santiago, provided they bring
together people from diﬀerent backgrounds. Mr Piñera is betting that dialogue
and a revamped government will break
deadlocks over how to reform the country.
The result could be a new Chilean model. 7

Bello Living beside the volcano
Colombia faces an external threat. It needs more internal political unity

U

nder a pitiless sun, the river of
humanity crosses the Simón Bolívar
bridge without cease, its ﬂow more
powerful than the muddy stream beneath. Each day at least 40,000 people
cross from Venezuela to Villa del Rosario
in Colombia. Most cross back again,
laden with bulging sacks and suitcases
containing fresh food, clothing and
medicines. Each day, some 1,500 do not
return, joining the 4.6m Venezuelans
who have left their country in search of
work, safety and a better life.
This is a humanitarian crisis, but one
that Colombia is coping with admirably.
In Villa del Rosario hundreds of people
line up for lunch at a communal kitchen
operated by the local bishop. Many still
live in Venezuela, but are malnourished.
Others are heading on. Nearby, there is a
health post for migrants. More than 1.5m
have been vaccinated. A shelter provides
temporary accommodation for those
who are ill, who have come to give birth
or who need to rest. Although the un and
ngos are helping, foreign aid covers less
than a ﬁfth of the additional costs Colombia is incurring, mainly in health
care and education.
That is not the only price of living
next to Nicolás Maduro’s dictatorship in
Venezuela. At police headquarters outside the nearby city of Cúcuta, Colonel
José Palomino has a colour-coded map of
the 143km (89 miles) of border in his
charge. Each colour corresponds to a
criminal outﬁt, ranging from the eln, a
Colombian guerrilla group, to several
Colombian and Venezuelan drug, extortion and smuggling gangs. “Each group
has a slice of the border,” he says.
Until now, they have stayed there. The
murder rate in Cúcuta, a city of 800,000
people, is similar to the national average.
But for how much longer? The ﬁrst wave

of Venezuelan migrants consisted largely
of businessmen, professionals and workers. Now, says Colonel Palomino, “bandits
and delinquents” are starting to come
“because there’s nothing left to rob there”.
The government of President Iván
Duque bet on Mr Maduro’s downfall. In
February Venezuela broke diplomatic ties
after Colombia tried to send humanitarian
aid across the border in partnership with
Juan Guaidó, the opposition leader whom
it recognises as interim president. Mr
Maduro shelters the eln, which runs
illegal mining in southern Venezuela. He
welcomed dissidents from the farc, a
much larger guerrilla army which signed a
peace agreement in 2016. In September
Venezuela carried out a military exercise
near the border. “Misunderstandings or
deliberate provocations by…armed groups
could easily drag the two countries” into a
ﬁght, worries Crisis Group, an ngo.
Mr Duque says he has undertaken no
aggressive actions. “We’ve placed no
troops on the border, or ﬂights close to it,”
he told Bello. The problem is that there is
no sign that sanctions by the United States

will dislodge Mr Maduro. Political
change in Latin America, including the
election of Alberto Fernández, a left-ofcentre Peronist, as Argentina’s president,
is weakening the diplomatic front
against the Maduro regime. “The only
way to change the migratory ﬂow is to
end the dictatorship,” insists Carlos
Trujillo, Colombia’s foreign minister.
The ﬂow may even increase as conditions deteriorate.
This comes when the internal situation in Colombia is delicate. Álvaro
Uribe, the leader of Mr Duque’s party,
campaigned against the farc peace
agreement. In oﬃce, Mr Duque has
implemented it. It is working, albeit
imperfectly. More than 11,000 former
guerrillas have entered civilian life. The
government is moving ahead with development plans in the areas where they
operated. But its critics claim that under
the inﬂuence of Mr Uribe it is dragging
its feet on promised land reform.
Colombia is failing to collect a full
peace dividend. The murder rate has
remained broadly stable since 2016,
despite the end of the war. The security
forces are “strategically confused on
priorities”, says a retired general. Mr
Duque’s defence minister, who is close to
Mr Uribe, is criticised for having politicised the army. In an unprecedented
move in August, a group of retired oﬃcers published a letter complaining that
corruption and poor leadership were
damaging the army’s public standing.
Even the government’s critics admit
that the situation is not disastrous. But it
is worrying. Colombia has made huge
strides in this century. Because of the
threat posed by Venezuela, the consolidation of internal peace has become even
more urgent. Mr Duque, once a sceptic of
the peace deal, must now achieve that.

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Asia

Indonesia’s armed forces

About turn!
S U K A WA N G I

After spending decades trying to rein in the army, politicians are again giving it a
big role in government

A

long a dirt track bordered by rice paddies and studded with potholes, soldiers and villagers labour side by side. They
are levelling the rutted surface so that it can
be paved over with concrete. The road they
are building will make it much easier for
farmers to transport their crops to market.
But this is not what really brings the soldiers to Sukawangi, a sprawling village in
western Java. Their primary purpose is to
forge friendships with the locals or, as
Lieutenant-Colonel Yogi Nugroho puts it,
to “build the chemistry between the military and the people”. Such eﬀorts are paying oﬀ. A poll conducted in 2015 showed
that 90% of Indonesians trust Tentara Nasional Indonesia (tni), the armed forces,
making it the most respected institution in
the country. Mission accomplished.
For most of Indonesia’s history, the
army has been deeply involved in civilian
life. Since its founding in 1945 as a guerrilla
force to overthrow Dutch colonial rule, it
has seen itself as the breastplate of the people. This narrative bolstered an ideology
known as dwifungsi, or “dual function”,

which held that the armed forces should be
responsible for maintaining Indonesia’s
political and social order as well as its territorial cohesion. Suharto, a strongman who
held power from 1966 to 1998, reserved a
ﬁfth of the seats in parliament for the
armed forces and appointed oﬃcers to important positions in government. Over his
three-decade regime, he made use of the
“territorial system”, under which soldiers
were stationed in almost every village
across the archipelago, to control and repress the population. So when Suharto resigned in 1998, ushering in an age of democracy, lawmakers abolished military
representation in parliament and dramatically narrowed the armed forces’ responsiAlso in this section
34 Student murders in Bangladesh
35 Fighting groping in Japan
35 Central Asia’s convoluted borders
36 Banyan: Faith and politics in Australia

33

bilities, obliging them to end all business
activity, for example, and hiving oﬀ the police as a separate force. tni was permitted
to conduct “military operations other than
war”, but only in cases such as disaster relief and humanitarian assistance.
Twenty years later these reforms not
only remain incomplete, but are being
eroded. Under Joko Widodo, popularly
known as Jokowi, who has been president
since 2014, the political inﬂuence of tni
has grown. Jokowi has installed retired
generals in powerful civilian posts such as
presidential chief of staﬀ and head of the
state intelligence agency, and in April
agreed to assign several hundred activeduty generals and colonels to civilian agencies and ministries. With Jokowi’s blessing, tni has also regained a role in internal
security, to help ﬁght terrorism, and has set
up a special counter-terrorism unit. On October 23rd Jokowi appointed as his minister of defence Prabowo Subianto, a retired
general whose party would like to erase the
distinction between external defence and
internal security.
tni is also expanding the deﬁnition of
military operations other than war. Between 2014 and 2017, it or the defence ministry signed 133 deals with dozens of ministries, civil-society organisations and
universities, promising, among other
things, to help the national population
agency provide family planning, the National Logistics Agency to monitor food
prices, prisons to educate inmates, the 1

34

Asia

2 ministry of agriculture to identify suitable

land for farming and farmers to organise
the harvest. Activists and scholars worry
that, taken together, these developments
constitute a resurrection of dwifungsi.
tni’s persistent belief that it is at one with
the people—the outgoing minister of defence, also a retired general, describes his
philosophy of warfare as “total people’s defence”—only stokes their fears.
tni has successfully agitated to roll
back the reform that prevented serving ofﬁcers from taking civilian jobs. But Evan
Laksmana of the Centre for Strategic and
International Studies, a think-tank in Jakarta, argues that this is motivated not so
much by a lust for power as by tni’s poor
personnel-management, which has produced more oﬃcers than there are suitable
positions. In fact it is the politicians who
are luring soldiers back out of the barracks,
argues a recent paper by Leonard Sebastian, Emirza Syailendra and Keoni Marzuki
of the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies in Singapore. When Jokowi was
ﬁrst elected president in 2014, he was new
to national politics and lacked allies. To
counter the hostile forces arrayed against
him, he turned to tni.
Politicians need tni’s help to implement their policies. Both the central and local bureaucracies are hobbled by corruption, inertia and conﬂicting regulations.
tni, by contrast, is a disciplined organisation that can mobilise personnel across the
country at short notice. Mr Sebastian and
his colleagues examined a number of deals
struck by civilian institutions and tni between 2013 and 2018. They found that these
arrangements were initiated at the behest
of civilian leaders, “often due to a lack of
conﬁdence in their own abilities”.
Though politicians are usually pleased
with the work tni does on their behalf,
overseeing it is diﬃcult. An incident in a
village on the island of Sumatra in 2015 illustrates how badly wrong non-military
missions can go. When the local army command, charged with implementing the
government’s programme of “food selfsuﬃciency”, attempted to acquire land for
cultivation, villagers protested. Soldiers
proceeded to intimidate them. The conﬂict
escalated, with soldiers beating up disgruntled farmers on several occasions.
Members of the armed forces cannot be
tried in civilian courts, however, so no one
was ever punished.
In the years following Suharto’s downfall, politicians vowed to subordinate the
armed forces to civilian authority. Today
they seem to regard tni as a partner in government. As Mr Sebastian and his colleagues write: “The ongoing reliance on
military solutions for civilian problems is
symptomatic of a weak democracy.” Tell
that to the villagers of Sukawangi, who cannot wait to use their tni-built road. 7

The Economist November 2nd 2019
Politics in Bangladesh

Learning the hard
way
DHAKA

The ruling party’s youth wing controls
university campuses with an iron ﬁst

E

arly in october Abrar Fahad, a student
at Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (buet) was beaten to
death in his dormitory. Police have detained 21 people in connection with the
murder, many of them members of the
Chhatra League, the student wing of the
ruling Awami League party. He appears to
have oﬀended them by making critical
comments on Facebook about a watersharing deal the government recently
struck with India.
The death of Mr Fahad, who was 21, has
prompted protests at the university and a
public outcry across the country. Yet such
killings are quite common in Bangladesh,
where violent party politics is mirrored—
and often ampliﬁed—on university campuses. “This is part of the university culture,” says Mubashar Hasan of the University of Oslo. “Dormitory rooms are turned
into torture rooms to quell opposition.”
The Chhatra League “basically controls
universities on behalf of the government”,
explains a 21-year-old student from Dhaka,
the capital. That is important to the authorities, since universities have long been
hotbeds of political dissent. No male student can get a room in the halls of residence without co-operating with the
League or having a political connection,
says a fellow student. “They show their tyranny very publicly in these universities.”
Instead of allocating the individual

Candles for Fahad

rooms, the Chhatra League puts all the
ﬁrst-year students—sometimes up to
100—in one enormous dormitory, the
“public room”. Here, ﬁrst-years are subjected to “ragging”, meaning bullying by older
students, who report back to the League’s
leadership. The whole process is designed
to scare students into toeing the line.
“Abrar didn’t do that,” notes the student
from Dhaka. League members accused Mr
Fahad of being involved with Chhatra Shibir, the student wing of Jamaat-e-Islami, an
Islamist opposition party. “Anyone who
opposes the government can be called Shibir nowadays,” the Dhaka-ite continues.
“It’s an easy excuse for [the League] to beat
someone up and no one will say anything.”
The Chhatra League’s clout extends far
beyond dormitories. Earlier this year,
when the government gave funds to Jahangirnagar University for a development project, the local branch of the League demanded a share. The vice-chancellor paid
up, and later gave yet more money to the
League’s central committee. Companies
are often forced to pay oﬀ the local branch
of the League in order to start a project or
operate in their area. A crackdown on opposition parties before last year’s election,
which saw the Awami League re-elected in
a landslide, has made it even harder to
stand up to the Chhatra League.
Bureaucrats, mps and the police connive in this system, says Mr Hasan. But
none of this is new, he points out. Before
Chhatra League, he says, there was Chhatra
Dal—the student wing of the Bangladesh
Nationalist Party, in government from 2001
to 2006. Chhatra Dal, like the Chhatra
League, operated with impunity. So did the
student front that backed Hussain Muhammad Ershad, the military dictator from
1983 to 1990. The Daily Star, a newspaper,
looked at all campus killings since independence in 1971 and found 151 murders for
which no charges had been brought.
Mr Fahad’s murder was perhaps a step
too far, however. His Facebook post echoed
widespread anti-Indian sentiment. Obaidul Quader, the general secretary of the
Awami League, said the government would
take action against the perpetrators “regardless of [their] aﬃliation”, although he
did remind people of the Chhatra League’s
“good accomplishments”. Sheikh Hasina
Wajed, the prime minister, had already
seemed inclined to rein in the Chhattra
League. Before Mr Fahad’s death she had
dismissed its president and general secretary and reshuﬄed its central committee.
buet’s vice-chancellor, meanwhile, has
promised not only to ban ragging, but also
to bar political organisations from campus. Students doubt they have seen the last
of their tormentors. “Maybe Chhatra
League will stop what they’re doing,” says
the student from Dhaka, “or at least take a
break. That would be nice.” 7

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Asia

Fighting groping in Japan

Pervert alert
TO KYO

Commuters are taking the law into
their own hands

T

hroughout her 20s, Yayoi Matsunaga
was groped, almost daily, on packed
rush-hour trains going to and from work.
Three decades later, she discovered that
her friend’s daughter was being molested
on her commute to high school. The teenager, after fruitless talks with the police
and railway companies, decided to hang a
sign from her bag that read: “Groping is a
crime. I will not cry myself to sleep.” The
groping stopped immediately. Inspired,
Ms Matsunaga launched a crowdfunding
campaign in 2015 to create badges with the
same message. They proved as eﬀective as
the sign: nearly 95% of users stopped experiencing groping on public transport, according to a survey.
Recent years have seen a ﬂurry of innovations in the ﬁght against groping—chikan in Japanese—in addition to the many
train services that oﬀer carriages which
only women can use, or have installed ceiling cameras in the hope of catching molesters on ﬁlm. Nari Woo and Remon Katayama of qccca, a startup, have launched
“Chikan Radar”, an app that enables users
to report groping and thus see where it is
common. Since its launch in August, 981
cases have been reported across Japan. The
Tokyo Metropolitan Police have also
created an app, “Digi Police”, that, when activated, screams “Stop it!” and produces a
full-screen message that says: “There is a
molester. Please help.” Shachihata, a company that sells personal seals, has developed a stamp that allows victims to mark
their attackers with invisible ink, which
can be detected under ultraviolet light. A
trial run of 500 anti-groping stamps, priced
at ¥2,500 ($23), sold out within 30 minutes.
There were 2,943 reported cases of groping in Japan in 2017, mostly in Tokyo. The
true number of victims is undoubtedly far
higher. Surveys suggest that half or more of
female commuters have experienced it, although only 10% of victims report the
crime to police. Some hold back out of fear
and embarrassment; others because they
do not want to be late for school or work.
“We are socialised to think that groping is
not a big deal,” says Ms Woo.
Groping has long been trivialised as a
nuisance rather than a form of sexual assault, says Masako Makino of Ryukoku
University. Oﬀenders face up to six months
in prison or ﬁnes of up to ¥500,000. (The
potential sentence rises to ten years if violence is involved.)

Invisible ink at the ready

It does not help that the media tend to
focus on stories about men who have been
falsely accused of groping. A book and ﬁlm
about a man unjustly accused of molesting
a schoolgirl became a hit in 2007. Insurance ﬁrms provide policies that defray the
cost to commuters of ﬁghting accusations
of groping. But Ms Matsunaga, who now
runs an organisation called the Groping
Prevention Activities Centre, remains
hopeful: “I believe that we will be able to
eliminate groping.” 7
Central Asia’s borders

Stalin’s splatter
R I S H TO N

Convoluted and disputed boundaries
are hampering regional integration

T

here was jubilation in August in Rishton, a town in the bit of the Fergana Valley that lies in Uzbekistan, when the gates
of a nearby border checkpoint with Kyrgyzstan were unlocked for the ﬁrst time in almost seven years. The opening reduced the
length of the journey to Sokh, an island of
Uzbek-governed territory surrounded by
Kyrgyzstan, from 150km to 50km. As the
crossing was reopened, oﬃcials from both
countries waxed lyrical about a renewed
spirit of fraternity. Kyrgyz and Uzbeks—
both Turkic-speaking, Muslim peoples—
are “like a bird with two wings”, mused Akram Madumarov, the governor of the province on the Kyrgyz side of the border. “If
one wing is missing, the bird cannot ﬂy.”
The next day, the bird’s wings were
clipped as the border gates were slammed
shut again. In early September the road
leading out of Rishton towards Sokh ended
in a tangle of barbed wire, the Uzbek ﬂag
ﬂuttering forlornly rather than festively.

35

“The Kyrgyz are our friends and brothers,”
said a cheery Uzbek border guard patrolling the closed frontier, who could not explain why it was sealed. Oﬃcials have unconvincingly
blamed
divergent
food-safety standards.
Indeed, for all the talk of brotherly love,
perhaps a more revealing moment came
two weeks later, when a shoot-out at another border post in the Fergana Valley, between Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, left four
border guards dead. That was the third fatal
incident on the Kyrgyz-Tajik border this
year. Three villagers have been killed in two
clashes near another Fergana Valley exclave, Vorukh, a Tajik-governed territory
encircled by Kyrgyzstan. This is one of nine
pockets of land in the valley that are ruled
by one country but surrounded by another
(see map).
For most of the 20th century the borders
that divide the Fergana Valley today were
merely internal administrative boundaries
within the Soviet Union. Ordinary people
could travel more or less freely between Soviet republics, to visit relatives, say, so it
mattered little that the lines sliced up the
region haphazardly. Although Soviet mythology holds that Stalin designed the cartographical crazy quilt to undermine Central Asian solidarity, in practice the
divisions were the result of horse-trading
by local power-brokers keen to keep particular locations in their ﬁefs. In addition, every Soviet republic was supposed to have a
population of at least 1m. The result was
meandering frontiers that do not even follow the region’s already muddled ethnic divisions. Sokh, for instance, although part
of Uzbekistan and encircled by Kyrgyzstan,
is peopled mostly by Tajiks.
After the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991,
the notional boundaries became ﬁrm borders. Herdsmen were suddenly cut oﬀ from
their pastures and farmers from their
wells. Border conﬂicts became, and remain, fairly common. They erupt over
seemingly petty matters—the placing of
electricity poles, say—the cause of the
dust-up that led to the closure of the border
crossing near Rishton in 2013. It does not 1
K Y R GY Z STA N
Tashkent

Barak

U Z B E K I STA N
Ferga na
Va lle y
Fergana

Rishton

Vorukh

TA J I K I STA N

Sokh

75 km

Osh

36

Asia

2 help that the Fergana Valley is Central

Asia’s most densely populated region, and
that ethnic violence can quickly intensify.
In the city of Osh in southern Kyrgyzstan,
clashes between the Kyrgyz and Uzbek
communities in 2010 left 470 people dead.
Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan dispute half
of their 1,000-kilometre frontier, using different historical maps to support conﬂicting claims. Until recently Uzbekistan, too,
was quick to bicker about borders, threatening to go to war over water-sharing and
even mining its frontier with Tajikistan. As
Central Asia’s most populous country and

The Economist November 2nd 2019

the only one that borders all the others, Uzbekistan was ideally placed to impede regional integration.
But after Uzbekistan’s dictator of almost
30 years died in 2016, his successor, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, abandoned prickly isolationism in favour of engagement. He has
ordered the opening of more frontier posts
and pledged co-operation over hydropower. He has also signed border agreements with both Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan. A separate treaty with Kyrgyzstan will
soon wipe one of the region’s exclaves, Barak, oﬀ the map, as part of a land swap. The

results of Uzbekistan’s overtures are tangible: trade with its neighbours shot up by
54% last year.
But the re-sealed border between Rishton and Sokh shows that travel around the
Fergana Valley remains far from frictionless. “What can we do?” shrugged one Sokh
resident. He was boarding a bus in Fergana,
the provincial capital in Uzbekistan proper
that oversees exclaves like Sokh. His journey home entails a long detour because of
the closed crossing-point at Rishton. “We
haven’t been able to travel freely since Soviet times,” he says philosophically. 7

Banyan A boost for believers
Australia’s government wants to allow religious people to discriminate

T

he lord works in mysterious ways.
For Christian leaders of a conservative bent, recent decades in Australia
have seen what the Anglican Archbishop
of Sydney, Glenn Davies, calls a “militant
secularism” deal repeated blows to the
devout. The most notable is the legalisation two years ago of same-sex marriage, after a postal survey showed Australians to be overwhelmingly in favour.
The passage of a bill on October 2nd
making it easier to get an abortion in
New South Wales is another. A cause
célèbre for religious conservatives is
Israel Folau, a rugby star and staunch
Christian who was sacked from his club
for saying that God’s plan for homosexuals was “hell”. Mr Folau’s case against
unfair dismissal is making its way
through the courts. But his treatment,
the archbishop says, “smacks of a new
and ugly Australia” in which believers
are unable to express their faith.
There are more general instances of
discrimination, Christian leaders say. In
the name of tolerance, diversity and
inclusion, many companies expect their
employees to leave their faith at home.
But, says Michael Stead, Anglican bishop
of South Sydney, faith is integral to a
Christian’s identity: “It’s not just something you can switch oﬀ.”
Yet just when all around is darkness
comes a ray of light. The right-wing
government of Scott Morrison, the prime
minister, has thrown its weight behind a
package of bills designed to provide
enforceable anti-discrimination protections for people with religious beliefs.
The legislation is expected to come to
parliament before the end of the year.
Many of the provisions work in just
the same way as laws against discrimination on the grounds of sex, race,
disability and so on. But as well as serv-

ing as a shield, the proposed legislation
also acts, as Luke Beck of Monash University puts it, as a “sword”. People could take
actions on the basis of their beliefs that
would clearly fall foul of other anti-discrimination legislation, without consequences. An upper-caste Hindu doctor, Mr
Beck suggests, could turn away a lowercaste patient he considered untouchable.
A devout pharmacist could refuse to provide contraception to an unmarried teenager. And although it would still be illegal
to deny women promotions, say, on the
basis of their sex, the sort of evidence used
to prove such abuses—sexist statements
by a boss, for example—would be protected by the proposed legislation if they had a
religious underpinning.
Cases like Mr Folau’s are tackled in the
bills, too. Large ﬁrms (ie, with a turnover of
A$50m ($34m) or more) may restrict employees from making statements of belief
only if that is to avoid “unjustiﬁable ﬁnancial hardship” to the ﬁrm. In other
words, ﬁrms could not sack an employee
like Mr Folau for denouncing the conduct
of their colleagues if he did so based on

religious convictions—unless a lucrative
deal hinged on it. Not only are the rights
of individuals protected, but also those
of religious entities, including schools
and charities. They are exempt from
rules against discrimination if the discrimination is done “in good faith”. That
could be a licence to expel gay pupils, for
instance. And on top of such distasteful
scenarios, it seems odd to give certain
people legal privileges—the right to act
in a way that would otherwise be unlawful—simply because they identify
themselves as religious.
The Australian Human Rights Commission, while approving of the protective provisions in the legislation, is
concerned about the assertive ones.
Others have joined it. Such provisions
may well be watered down. But the fact
that the bill has made it this far is striking, given Australia’s growing godlessness. In the most recent census, in 2016,
30% said they had no religion, compared
with 22% ﬁve years earlier.
Yet no previous prime minister has
been so “out and proud” as a Christian, as
John Warhurst of the Australian National
University puts it. Mr Morrison described his surprise election victory in
May as “a miracle”, which Archbishop
Davies says is “about right”. Mr Morrison
holds a weekly prayer session in his
oﬃce in Canberra.
Marion Maddox of Macquarie University points out that most Australian
Christians hold moderate beliefs, including accepting abortion, at least in
some circumstances. For the most part,
the anti-discrimination bill is a useful bit
of virtue-signalling by the political right.
Secularists are hardly on the back foot. It
is more a consolation prize to religious
leaders than the harbinger of a new
God-fearing era.

The Economist November 2nd 2019

China

Penal reform

A bigger cage

BEIJING

Justice in China is harsh. But courts are sending some convicts home

A

few weeks ago, people across China
were summoned to government ofﬁces. There they were given a piece of paper
to sign. It contained several pledges, including not to take part in political protests, not to leave their districts and to keep
their mobile phones switched on day and
night with gps enabled. For good measure
they were asked to aﬃx their thumbprints.
Those breaking their promises could be
sure of the risk: imprisonment.
The “commitments to self-discipline”,
as the documents were titled, were part of a
nationwide ratcheting-up of security in
preparation for oﬃcial celebrations of 70
years of Communist rule on October 1st. Yet
those who agreed to the stipulations had
reason to feel relieved. At least they were
not in prison already. They were convicts,
but serving their sentences at home.
Justice in China is often harsh. Last year
99% of criminal defendants were found
guilty. Only about 800 people were acquitted. China has been reducing the number
of capital oﬀences, but it is still believed to
execute thousands of people every year,
more than the rest of the world combined.

In the past two or three years the far western province of Xinjiang has built a vast
new gulag where it has interned without
trial 1m or more people, mostly ethnic Uighurs, often simply for being devout Muslims. The region is home to less than 2% of
China’s people, but last year hosted oneﬁfth of its criminal prosecutions.
For some, however, the chance of avoiding jail time has been growing. It used to be
that almost all convicted criminals were
sent to prison. Minor oﬀenders, such as
prostitutes and their clients, were sent to
“re-education through labour” camps
without even seeing a judge. But in recent
years the camps have been abolished and
courts have begun experimenting with
“correction in the community” sentences
instead of locking up people.
Since these pilots began in 2003, more
than 4.3m oﬀenders have served their time
Also in this section
38 Calling Nobel laureates
39 Chaguan: Xi’s contradiction

37

outside a cell. Today, about 700,000 are doing so. In some big cities, around 60% of
criminal sentences do not involve jail. Instead, convicts usually live at home and,
for at least eight hours a month, perform
unpaid labour such as cleaning streets or
clearing streams. Often they also have to attend at least eight hours monthly of instruction on how to be good citizens.
For many of those who receive such
sentences, the relief must be immense.
Torture and other forms of abuse are common in prisons. There is little sign that
conditions are improving. Early this century, however, oﬃcials began to wonder
whether, for less serious crimes, incarceration was eﬀective. Some noted that, despite
the large numbers being locked up, crime
rates were still increasing. So community
service was tried out in a few regions. In
2005 the government adopted a new policy
called “balancing leniency and severity”.
This meant continuing to impose long jail
sentences on people such as violent criminals, corrupt oﬃcials and those the Communist Party views as politically dangerous, while punishing petty oﬀenders more
lightly. In 2009 the community-corrections system was rolled out nationwide.
Participants are mainly serving suspended prison sentences of three years or
less. They need permission to leave their
home districts and are banned from travel
abroad. Some are electronically tagged. In
addition to their labour duty and study sessions, they have to make contact at least
weekly by telephone with a local commu- 1

38

China

2 nity-corrections bureau, of which nearly

3,000 have been set up. They are supposed
to be oﬀered practical assistance such as
help ﬁnding work and housing.
So far the system has been managed
with a hodgepodge of regulations that
some oﬃcials ﬁnd confusing and lacking
in legal weight. To remedy this, the government is preparing a national law on community corrections. On October 21st a second draft of this was presented to senior
legislators. As state media pointed out, it
included a notable addition. It said that
community-corrections work must “respect and guarantee human rights”. The
new draft requires that participants’ privacy be protected and their “personal freedom” not be restricted (though they would
need permission to leave their hometowns). It says their whereabouts will not
be tracked digitally unless they break rules.
The government has a monetary incentive to encourage community sentences.
The cost per convict is about one-tenth of
that for prisoners, reckons Wu Zongxian of
Beijing Normal University. Benjamin Liebman of Columbia Law School thinks that
judges dangle suspended sentences as a reward for defendants who compensate victims. He speculates that judges also sometimes use the community-service
approach when they think defendants are
innocent. Courts do not want to oﬀend
state prosecutors by acquitting people.
Oﬃcials think the system is working. At
least while they are enrolled in the scheme,
only 0.2% of people re-oﬀend, they say.
About 10% of ex-prisoners do. But there is a
shortage of well-trained staﬀ. Many of
them are former guards at labour camps.
They are often more concerned with tracking participants’ movements than with rehabilitating them. The shortage is most
acute in rural areas, says Enshen Li of
Queensland University. This results in
huge unfairness for defendants who have
migrated to cities from the countryside.
Judges prefer to jail them rather than give
them suspended sentences because urban
probation oﬃcers often refuse to handle
them and there is no one in their place of
birth to oversee community service.
Nationwide, the percentage of criminal
trials that resulted in community sentences reached around 35% ﬁve years ago,
according to data collated by Yang Xue of
Nanjing Normal University. But since then
it has fallen to about 30%. One possibility is
that judges are growing more conscious of
the system’s ﬂaws. The new law may help
allay their concerns. But courts will remain
subject to the Communist Party’s whims.
In recent months police forces have been
vying to outdo each other in their eﬀorts to
implement the party’s campaign against
“black and evil forces”, a term covering
everyone from thugs to labour activists.
Those caught can expect no mercy. 7

The Economist November 2nd 2019
Academic exchange

Building bridges
and selling them
SHANGHAI

A giant Nobel forum helps Chinese
science and property developers

C

hina reveres Nobel prizes and it loves
things that are big. A four-day forum in
Shanghai, under way as The Economist went
to press, has been a perfect union of these.
It is one of the world’s largest-ever gatherings of Nobel laureates outside the award
ceremonies themselves, with 44 attending—mostly scientists, plus a few economists. Winners of prizes such as the Turing
award are also taking part. China staged the
inaugural World Laureates Forum last year,
billing it as a platform for global scientiﬁc
collaboration. But there is no question that
its main goal is the advancement of science
in China. At this year’s convention an
opening video, set to stirring music, dispensed with subtlety. One segment started
with Americans planting their ﬂag on the
Moon and culminated in Chinese astronauts holding theirs in space.
In a letter to the guests, President Xi
Jinping said China was willing to work with
all countries to cope with the challenges of
our age. Yet the concern hanging over Chinese science is whether the West is willing
to work with it (see Chaguan). America has
been most active in stepping up scrutiny of
Chinese researchers, worried that they
may be pilfering technology. Others, including Canada and Australia, have also
started taking a closer look.
That is one reason why China is keen to
gather foreign laureates. It generates the
kind of approbation that it feels it does not
get enough of abroad (the Communistruled country has produced only one Nobel
prize-winner of its own in science). The fo-

rum’s participants speak enthusiastically
about China’s scientiﬁc work. “What the
Chinese government understands and is
doing well is broad support for basic science,” Roger Kornberg, an American who
won the Nobel for chemistry, told state
television. It may be that some elderly laureates doddering around the hall are well
past their most productive years. But plenty of others are still at the cutting edge. At
least 40 have received their various awards
in the past decade. One held high oﬃce:
Steven Chu, America’s secretary of energy
under Barack Obama.
The topics discussed are widely varied,
covering ﬁelds ranging from dark matter
and the atomic analysis of water to preterm births. “It’s a little too remote from my
ﬁeld to be eﬃcient,” says one European attendee during a break, asking for anonymity to avoid oﬀending his hosts. But China
may beneﬁt. The head of a laboratory at a
leading American university says he has
tentatively oﬀered two postdoctoral fellowships to Chinese he has just met. A biologist from another American university
says the forum could draw talent to China.
“Back home it’s endless grant applications.
Here, they’re promising us stable funding
and a pipeline of researchers,” he says.
The organisers also appear to have a
narrower goal in mind. The forum is held
on a man-made island on a perfectly circular artiﬁcial lake about 70km from downtown Shanghai. The area, known as Lingang New City, feels desolate now, with
broad, empty streets and few businesses.
Local oﬃcials want to make it a technology
hub, home to research by the world’s best
scientists. They claim already to have
signed collaboration agreements with 40
of them. Whether or not these promises
come to fruition, the buzz may help Lingang’s marketing as it tries to entice investors. Planners seem to believe that an important commercial application of science
is developing valuable property. 7

The Economist November 2nd 2019

China

Chaguan Facing a contradiction

China needs global help to grow, so its rulers may have to rethink their obsession with control

O

n past form, boasts of China’s openness to the world will
come thick and fast when President Xi Jinping addresses the
Second China International Import Expo in Shanghai on November 5th. Speaking at the inaugural edition of that trade fair last year,
Mr Xi cast China as a champion of free trade and mutually beneﬁcial co-operation. Openness brings progress while seclusion leads
to backwardness, he declared. Slipping into ﬂuent Globalese, the
blandly uplifting argot used at gatherings of world leaders, billionaires and ceos, Mr Xi beamed that it was natural to share the fruits
of innovation “in our interconnected global village”.
China’s leader has every reason to oﬀer warm words at the upcoming event. Even as his country grows richer and more powerful, it is dependent on the world in ways that it cannot control. China has ambitions to become a standard-setting technology
superpower. For all its talk of self-reliance, it needs foreign knowhow to get there. In the short term, China is anxious for a truce in
its trade war with America. It wants to show other countries that it
is a team player, unlike that rule-breaking bully in Washington.
Further ahead its economy will need growing room. China is running out of useful places to build shiny airports and high-speed
railway lines at home, and wants its own global brands to vie with
Boeing or Apple. That will require new markets overseas.
Yet before he steps to his lectern in Shanghai, Mr Xi must preside over a diﬀerent meeting, a four-day session of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party ending on October 31st. Such
conclaves of nearly 400 top oﬃcials are typically held every year or
so at a high-security hotel run by the People’s Liberation Army in
western Beijing. The working language is not Globalese. Communiqués that emerge from these secret meetings are written in unlovely party jargon. State media announced that the plenum would
consider “important issues concerning how to uphold and improve the socialist system with Chinese characteristics and make
progress in modernising the country’s governance system and capacity”. That sounds dull, but the meaning is serious. Even tighter
controls are coming. Clues were dropped this month by an inﬂuential party journal, Qiushi, in extracts it published of a previously
secret speech in which Mr Xi pondered lessons from history.
“Whenever great powers have collapsed or decayed, a common

cause has been the loss of central authority,” he concluded.
Propaganda organs pretend there is no contradiction between
these two personas—a smiling President Xi talking to foreigners
about global villages, and Xi the general secretary grimly demanding party discipline and vigilance in the face of hostile external
forces and internal threats. On the plenum’s opening day, Xinhua,
a state news agency, asserted that the world had never seen a governing system with such advantages, combining an “economic
development miracle” with a “miracle of political stability”.
At home, it is fair to concede, many Chinese accept the social
contract implicit in that Xinhua commentary, that personal freedoms should be traded for prosperity and order. To outsiders, however, China’s two self-declared miracles are increasingly in tension. For a long time, many foreign admirers of China treated party
rule as a bit of a joke. This place has only one ideology, they chuckled: making money. Unfortunately for such people, even as China
loosens some rules on market access or foreign investment, the
party not only refuses to fade away but is becoming ever more visible and intrusive. Very possibly the guiding ideology is a desire for
absolute power, rather than Marxist idealism. In a secretive autocracy, it is impossible to know Mr Xi’s real beliefs. Similarly, outsiders can only guess at the meaning of fawning adulation heaped
on him before the plenum, such as by a regional party committee
which said oﬃcials should, deep in their hearts, “strengthen their
trust and love in General Secretary Xi Jinping as the core of the
party, the people’s leader and commander-in-chief of the army”.
This may reﬂect Mr Xi’s mightiness, or his weakness and insecurity. But to judge by his actions, Mr Xi has asserted the party’s total
authority over China’s system of state capitalism, from law courts
to private ﬁrms and lumbering state enterprises. And one powergrab often prompts another. When modestly paid bureaucrats
have sway over billion-dollar assets at the same time that feistier
newspapers are silenced and independent lawyers locked up, it is
no surprise that the party has to launch anti-corruption campaigns so ﬁerce that some oﬃcials fear taking decisions at all.
Running a 21st-century economy with ideas from the 1950s
The very complexity of modern Chinese society, with its growing
mobility and personal freedoms for those who stay within partydeﬁned boundaries, seems to convince China’s leaders that they
must tighten and retighten their grip. Increasingly that involves
high-technology systems of control, from algorithms that censor
social media, to facial-recognition systems that stop errant citizens from catching high-speed trains. To oﬃcials at home, technoauthoritarianism is a saviour. With big data to crunch and nowhere for miscreants to hide, perhaps top-down rule can at last be
made to work. Abroad, the trade-oﬀs look diﬀerent. Not long ago,
Silicon Valley investors might have swooned over a mobile-payment system built around Chinese facial-recognition technology,
for instance. Now, shrewd fund managers—and young potential
consumers in the West—might ask whether the same cameras are
used to repress Muslims in the western region of Xinjiang.
The authoritarian turn that China is taking, in the name of saving one-party rule from itself, is hard to square with a quest for
globally driven growth. Already foreign bosses privately admit to
wondering, as never before, what it means when a Chinese business partner is a party member. Mr Xi seems to want a China that is
open to foreign investors and inventions but closed to dangerously foreign (meaning liberal, Western) ideas. Communists are fascinated by contradictions. This one may prove hard to resolve. 7

39

40

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Middle East & Africa

Also in this section
41 Lebanon’s crisis
42 A bloody mess in Iraq
42 Africa’s narco state
43 Violence in Ethiopia

Islamic State

Decapitated, not defeated

I STA N B U L A N D R I YA D H

Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi is dead, but his ultra-violent jihadist group lives on

A

s its so-called caliphate expanded
across Syria and Iraq, Islamic State (is)
promised its followers an apocalyptic battle to come. Eager jihadist propagandists
predicted that a ﬁnal victory over the “crusader armies” would usher in the day of
judgment and give birth to a new world.
The man who was to lead that battle, the
self-proclaimed caliph, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, instead blew himself up in a tunnel in
Syria on October 26th, murdering two of
his own children as he died.
His suicide, to avoid capture by American forces, marks the end of an era for is.
The group once held sway over millions of
Syrians and Iraqis in an area the size of Britain. It had already lost its territory, clawed
back at staggering cost by a mix of American air power, Syrian militiamen and Iraqi
troops. Now it has lost its leader as well.
Yet this does not mark the end of is. The
group endures as a low-level insurgency in
parts of Syria and Iraq, carrying out attacks
(see map on next page) and preying on civilians to fund its operations. It has also
diversiﬁed, with a string of wilayats (provinces) around the world. Though it may

never again hold so much territory, it will
remain a threat. And the conditions that allowed it to rise—a region of corrupt, sectarian and ineﬀective governments that lord
over poor, alienated populations—have, if
anything, grown worse.
Mr Baghdadi kept a low proﬁle (see
Obituary). After he ascended the pulpit of a
Mosul mosque in 2014 to declare a caliphate, he would not be seen in public for ﬁve
years. Charisma mattered less than ambition. Even Osama bin Laden, the former
leader of al-Qaeda, thought it premature to
establish a caliphate. By taking advantage
of the chaos of Syria’s civil war to seize territory, Mr Baghdadi made his movement
inﬂuential enough to draw tens of thousands of followers from around the world
(some of whom, allegedly, are pictured
above in a Syrian prison).
His death will disrupt is, but perhaps
not for long. In a forthcoming book Jenna
Jordan of the Georgia Institute of Technology examines over 1,000 cases involving
the killing or capture of leaders of terrorist
or insurgent groups. She says three factors
contribute to a group’s resilience after-

wards: its degree of bureaucracy, ability to
draw on local resources and ideological
zeal. These qualities ensure that its mission does not depend on a single leader.
is ranks highly on all three. It has kept
meticulous records and exported its procedures to international franchises that can
apply them independently. Though it no
longer pulls in $1m a day, as it once did, it
still has deep pockets, and is likely to beneﬁt from local Sunni disaﬀection in Syria, as
Bashar al-Assad’s reviled forces ﬁll the vacuum left by President Donald Trump’s retreat. Its ideological purity resonates independently of Mr Baghdadi. As a result, is
“should ultimately choose a successor easily and recover quickly,” says Ms Jordan. Indeed, it has proved its resilience before. Mr
Baghdadi rose to the top because two predecessors were killed in American strikes
in 2006 and 2010.
It is unclear who might succeed him.
The group has yet to acknowledge his death
on social-media channels used by followers. Most of his lieutenants are shrouded in
secrecy. One of them, Abu al-Hassan alMuhajir, the group’s spokesman, can be
ruled out as a candidate: he was killed in a
separate raid the following day.
Regardless of who leads it, is is keen to
rebuild, which might explain why Mr Baghdadi died in Idlib, far from his former redoubt in north-east Syria and western Iraq.
In theory this was inhospitable ground.
The province is a frequent target of Syrian
and Russian air strikes and is dominated by
Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (hts), a former aﬃli- 1

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Middle East & Africa

2 ate of al-Qaeda which is opposed to is.

But Idlib is also home to Hurras al-Din, a
more radical splinter of hts still loyal to alQaeda. Mr Baghdadi was found in an area
controlled by the group, in the house of one
of its leaders. Some reports suggest that his
host was an is agent, but several experts
raise another intriguing possibility: that
Mr Baghdadi was exploring a rapprochement with al-Qaeda, from which is acrimoniously split in 2013. A detente between the
two titans of global terrorism would cause
a serious headache for counter-terrorism
oﬃcials around the world.
is already has a presence far beyond Syria and Iraq. Its franchises remain a threat,
despite a slowing in the pace of their attacks in 2018. Islamic State Khorasan has
entrenched itself in eastern Afghanistan. It
conducted more suicide-bombings than
the Taliban in 2018, despite losing more
than 50 senior leaders in the past few years.
The is branch in northern Nigeria, which
split from Boko Haram, is becoming steadily more powerful. And since 2018 there
have been 11 is suicide bombings in Indonesia and six in the Philippines, including
one that killed 23 worshippers in January.
Turkey fears it may be a target for immediate retaliation. This spring the interior
minister remarked that is activity was
higher than at any time in nearly three
years. “The longer they fail to stage attacks,
the more desperate they are to do so,” says a
security oﬃcial. Within days of Mr Baghdadi’s death, dozens of alleged is sympathisers were detained, including three men
suspected of planning a big attack in Istanbul on October 29th, a national holiday.
Yet the raid that killed Mr Baghdadi took
place just a few kilometres from the Turkish border, in a part of Syria crawling with
Turkish informers and dotted with Turkish
army posts. Mr Muhajir was found in Jara-

bulus, within a Syrian “safe zone” that Turkey established in 2016. The presence of is
leaders on Turkey’s doorstep points to an
embarrassing lapse in intelligence.
Although Mr Trump thanked Turkey for
its help, oﬃcials in Ankara made only a few
vague statements about their role. A source
close to the Turkish army says “no intelligence or military co-operation” took place
between America and Turkey. The Americans gave notice only to avoid conﬂict with
the Turkish army. That American commandos embarked from northern Iraq, 700km
from their target, instead of an airbase in
southern Turkey, is a sign of how frosty relations are between the two nato allies.
The raid came just weeks after Mr
Trump withdrew American troops from
north-east Syria, clearing the way for Turkey to invade and rout the People’s Protection Units (ypg), a Kurdish-led militia that
fought is alongside the Americans. His order left the region to be carved up by Turkey, Russia, and Mr Assad’s regime. And it
reportedly imperilled the Baghdadi operation, which relied on Kurdish assistance.
The withdrawal has since been partially
reversed. America now says it will leave
troops in eastern Syria and will even send
tanks to prevent is from seizing oilﬁelds,
once a key source of revenue. But the group
is in no position to do so. More likely the
Americans intend to stop Mr Assad from
tapping his own oil, an objective that is
both strategically and legally dubious.
It is confusion, not a successful commando raid, that will be Mr Trump’s legacy
in Syria. The mission relied on having
American troops in the region, which he is
withdrawing; working with allies, whom
he disparages; and relying on intelligence
agencies, which he derides. When Mr
Baghdadi’s successor emerges, America
will be ill-placed to deal with him. 7
Islamic State attacks

Areas of control
October 28th 2019

TURKEY

Turkish troops and
Turkish-backed Syrian rebels

100 km

Jarabulus
Site of Abu Bakr
al-Baghdadi’s death

Aleppo

Jihadists

Mosul
Kurds

Kurds and government

Idlib
Government

Mediterranean
Sea

Jan 1st-Oct 29th 2019
Fatalities 20
60

Turkish troops

Euph
rat
es

SYRIA

IRAN

Samarra

Rebels
(US-backed)

LEBANON

Baghdad

Damascus

IRAQ
ISRAEL

Sparsely
populated
JORDAN
SAUDI ARABIA

Sources: IHS Conﬂict Monitor; ACLED

Tigr
is
Government

41

Lebanon’s crisis

A Saad ending

The prime minister’s resignation is
unlikely to satisfy protesters

A

fter nearly two weeks of nationwide
protests, the demonstrators in Lebanon claimed their ﬁrst scalp. On October
29th the prime minister, Saad Hariri, said
he had reached a “dead end” trying to deal
with their demands over corruption and
the stagnant economy. A package of meagre reforms, announced on October 21st,
satisﬁed no one. So Mr Hariri said he was
stepping down, along with his government. “It has become necessary for us to
make a great shock to ﬁx the crisis,” he said.
Upon hearing the news, protesters in Beirut broke into applause.
Mr Hariri’s government had struggled
to perform the most basic tasks, such as
providing 24-hour electricity or drinkable
water. Internet connections in Lebanon are
among the world’s slowest. Rubbish often
piles up in the streets, or is dumped in the
Mediterranean. After the government in
mid-October proposed to tax calls made via
WhatsApp, a messaging service, public anger erupted. As many as 1m people have
joined the protests, in a country with fewer
than 5m citizens. Mr Hariri’s departure is
unlikely to persuade the demonstrators to
end their campaign.
A rotten political system is at the heart
of Lebanon’s problems. The agreement that
ended the country’s 15-year civil war in 1990
created a complex power-sharing arrangement that remains in place today. Government posts and public-sector jobs are divvied up among Sunnis, Shias and
Christians—regardless of merit. Former
warlords still hold sway, hogging government contracts. Some people fear that the
resignation of Mr Hariri, a Sunni, will
merely contribute to rising sectarian tensions. Michel Aoun, a doddering Christian,
remains president; Nabih Berri, a Shia, is
speaker of parliament.
Both men are allied to Lebanon’s strongest power-broker, Hassan Nasrallah, who
leads Hizbullah, a Shia militia-cum-political-party backed by Iran. Many blame it for
aggravating the crisis. The resignation of
Mr Hariri leaves it more exposed. But rather
than come up with solutions, Mr Nasrallah
has denounced the protests as an Israeli
and American plot. Shortly before Mr Hariri tendered his resignation, bully boys clad
in black and answering to Mr Nasrallah
stormed Beirut’s Martyrs’ Square, the centre of the protests. “Shia, Shia,” they
chanted as they beat protesters. Riot police
watched. “The security forces don’t want to 1

42

Middle East & Africa

The Economist November 2nd 2019

2 deal with the protests formally, so they do

it informally, with thugs,” says Ali Hashem,
a Lebanese commentator.
Despite such provocations, the protests
so far have been remarkably peaceful and
non-sectarian. On October 27th hundreds
of thousands of people formed a chain
stretching from Sidon in the south to Akkar
in the north. Demonstrators have staged
raves in city squares and made Beethoven’s
“Ode to Joy” their anthem. But they are also
leaderless and lack clear goals. Some want a
secular parliament in which mps are individually elected, rather than through sectarian lists, as under the current system.
Others fear that, given the numerical superiority of Shias, such reforms would simply
entrench Hizbullah in power.
A day before Mr Hariri resigned, Riad
Salameh, the veteran central-bank governor, said Lebanon needed a political solution to avert an economic collapse. Banks
have been closed for over a week, leading to
fears of a run when they reopen. Meanwhile the protesters are growing tired and
more concerned about their safety, says an
organiser. Faced with the prospect of Hizbullah taking over the government, some
may prefer sticking with the old political
class, even Mr Hariri (who has been asked
to stay on as a caretaker prime minister).
Western powers might be convinced to release long-promised loans. None of that,
though, would solve Lebanon’s deep structural problems. 7
Iraq’s crisis

A bloody mess

Another Arab prime minister looks set
to fall, as protests continue in Iraq

I

f it were not for the ﬂags being waved, it
would be diﬃcult to tell the diﬀerence
between the protests in Lebanon and those
in Iraq. In Baghdad, as in Beirut, masses of
people have taken to the streets, angry over
corruption, poor governance and a lack of
jobs. Thousands have also come out in cities such as Basra and Karbala in Iraq’s Shia
south, the government’s heartland. But unlike in Lebanon (so far), the protests in Iraq
have been met with extreme violence. At
least 250 people have been killed by the authorities and their allied militias since the
turmoil began on October 1st.
It looks as if Adel Abdul-Mahdi, Iraq’s
prime minister, may suﬀer the same fate as
his Lebanese counterpart, Saad Hariri, who
stepped down on October 29th. Mr AbdulMahdi came to power after elections last
year produced a political deadlock. He was
the compromise candidate of Muqtada al-

Burning with rage in Baghdad

Sadr, a ﬁrebrand cleric who leads parliament’s largest bloc, and Hadi al-Amiri, who
heads an alliance of Iranian-backed Shia
militias. But Mr Sadr has now abandoned
him and Mr Amiri is wavering.
His removal is unlikely to satisfy the
protesters. Most see him as a puppet of the
politicians who have plundered Iraq. Even
after the jihadists of Islamic State were
pushed oﬀ their territory two years ago, the
government dithered over rebuilding. The
people have beneﬁted little from record oil
production. About a ﬁfth of the population
is poor. But instead of helping them, politicians enrich themselves and their militias.
Much of the public’s anger has focused
on those militias and their patron, Iran
(which calls the protests an act of sedition).
In the holy city of Karbala protesters tore
down posters of Ayatollah Ali Khamenei,
Iran’s supreme leader, and burnt the Iranian consulate. A mob in Amarah lynched the
local commander of Asaib Ahl al-Haq, a militia that considers Mr Khamenei its leader.
And in Kut protesters torched the home of
Qasim al-Araji, a prominent member of Mr
Amiri’s alliance.
Militia commanders vowed revenge. On
October 27th Abu Mahdi al-Muhandes, the
deputy head of the Hashd al-Shaabi, an
umbrella group of government-funded militias, ordered his men to “stand against
discord”. The next day his followers opened
ﬁre on protesters in Karbala. Between 14
and 30 people were reportedly killed. The
authorities say no one died.
In the past Mr Sadr championed protests. But this time his eﬀorts to co-opt
them have failed. When he drove to a rally
in his hometown of Najaf, protesters
would not let him out of his car. More senior clerics also seem to be losing their
sway. Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani has
called for restraint on both sides. But some
criticise him for helping bring to power the
parties responsible for misgoverning Iraq.

The authorities have re-raised the concrete barriers around Baghdad’s Green
Zone, the seat of government. Inside, some
favour an even more forceful response to
the unrest and want Mr Abdul-Mahdi to
take the rap until the bloodshed is over.
Others have begun squabbling over who
gets what once the prime minister goes.
Outside, the protesters are becoming
more angry, more conﬁdent and more numerous. Some observers fear they will take
down the whole political system. What
they want to replace it with is unclear. 7
Breaking Bissau

Coups, drugs and
party ﬁnance
BISSAU

Africa’s most famous narco-state goes
to the polls

N

ear the port of Bissau, the capital of
Guinea-Bissau, one of Africa’s smallest
states, is a neglected monument to past rebellion. A giant ﬁst of black steel commemorates striking dockers gunned down by
Portuguese soldiers in 1959. The strike—
and subsequent massacre—helped start a
war for independence led by the African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and
Cape Verde (paigc), a Soviet-sponsored
guerrilla movement. It took power in 1974
when Portugal’s dictatorship fell.
For much of the nearly 50 years since,
the main problem in Guinea-Bissau has
been the paigc. Presidential elections are
due on November 24th. On October 29th
the president, José Mário Vaz, sacked his
government and appointed a new prime
minister, though the dismissed one, Aristides Gomes, refused to leave oﬃce. If he
does, it will bring to eight the number of 1

The Economist November 2nd 2019
2 prime ministers since Mr Vaz won the pres-

idential election in 2014. Despite huge
amounts of support, including a sizeable
un mission, Guinea-Bissau, a country of
1.8m people dependent mostly on the export of cashew nuts for foreign exchange,
cannot seem to produce even a vaguely capable government. It is a lesson in the diﬃculty of changing deep-rooted systems of
corrupt politics in weak states.
paigc resembles less a political party
than an extended family ﬁghting over a
shrinking inheritance. In the past coups
were incredibly common—the country has
had at least a dozen attempts, with the latest successful one in 2012. Another one
seems less likely now, thanks to the presence of peacekeepers from other West African countries. But political strife continues nonetheless. For the past four years Mr
Vaz, a member of paigc, has refused to accept the prime minister appointed by
paigc members in parliament, instead preferring to rule on his own. In the presidential election Mr Vaz will face oﬀ against Domingos Simões Pereira, one of the thwarted
prime ministers, as well as against another
former paigc prime minister, Carlos Domingos Gomes Júnior, and nine other independent candidates.
The paigc’s inﬁghting has been compounded by a reliance on corruption to
fund politics. Most prominently that has
involved state complicity in cocaine trafﬁcking from South America through to Europe. More than a decade ago Guinea-Bissau was named a “narco state” by un
oﬃcials because of how deeply drugs trafﬁckers had penetrated its government.
João Bernardo “Nino” Vieira, the longest
serving president, was assassinated in
2009 in a feud seemingly linked to drugs
traﬃcking. In September almost two
tonnes of cocaine were seized by the judiciary police. That followed a seizure of
around 800kg in March, just before legislative elections. It is all but certain that the
shipments were being protected by a local
political faction. It is also plausible that the
traﬃckers were betrayed by a rival one.
The presidential election seems unlikely to ﬁx the crisis. Indeed, it may be making
things worse. On October 26th a protester
was killed by police during a demonstration against the election roll, which nonpaigc candidates say has been manipulated to beneﬁt the party. What little money
the state has is being looted to buy inﬂuence in the power struggle within the
paigc. Government salaries go unpaid,
says Amadu Djamanca, who runs the Observatory of Democracy and Governance, a
local ngo. The cashew industry is being
crushed by an export tax that is intended to
fund investment in infrastructure—
though the money raised has gone missing. Whatever happens, ordinary citizens
seem sure to suﬀer. 7

Middle East & Africa
Ethiopia

The clash of
nationalisms
A DA M A

Ethnic violence threatens to tear
Ethiopia apart

E

very window of the factory on the outskirts of Adama is smashed. On the side
of the road are the scorched remains of a
bus and lorries torched by angry young
men last week. This scene of mob violence,
just 75km from Addis Ababa, the capital, is
one that is becoming wearily familiar to
many Ethiopians.
The democratic revolution kick-started
by Abiy Ahmed, the prime minister, last
year has long been bittersweet. The government released tens of thousands of political prisoners, welcomed back exiled opponents and promised free and fair elections
in 2020. Last month Abiy won a Nobel
peace prize, for helping end a decades-long
conﬂict with neighbouring Eritrea. But his
eﬀorts to put his own country on a more
liberal path have been marred by rising violence and ethnic tensions. The latest killings suggest it is the transition’s darker
side that is ascendant.
The violence started on October 23rd
after hundreds of young men gathered outside the residence of Jawar Mohammed, a
controversial activist who returned to Ethiopia last year at Abiy’s invitation. Both men
are Oromos, Ethiopia’s largest ethnic
group, and are popular in the region. But Jawar’s supporters, a youth group known as
the “Qeerroo”, took to the streets of Addis
Ababa and other towns after their leader
said he faced a state-orchestrated attempt
on his life. In a post shared with his 1.75m
Facebook followers he said police had tried
to remove his government security detail
in the dead of night. They had resisted.
What followed was reminiscent of protests in Oromia that helped to propel Abiy to
power. Groups of Qeerroo burned tyres and
blocked roads into the capital. They

ERITREA
SUDAN

Red
Sea

Tigray
Amhara
Addis
Ababa

SOUTH
S UDAN

DJIBOUTI

Adama
Oromia

ETHIOPIA
SOMALI A

UGANDA

K E N YA

300 km

marched, carrying sticks and chanting in
support of Jawar. Shops and businesses
shut. Copies of Abiy’s new book, which
preaches national unity, were set alight.
It soon took a nastier turn. In Adama,
groups of mostly Amhara men (the second
largest ethnicity) confronted the Qeerroo.
Clashes broke out. Vehicles, shops and
businesses were burned. At least 16 people
died. Most were stoned to death. Near Addis Ababa non-Oromo were killed in unprovoked attacks.
Spreading violence may now have
claimed as many as 80 lives, says Ethiopia’s
human rights commissioner. Some died in
attacks on churches and mosques, in a
worrying sign that ethnic conﬂicts risk
turning into religious ones, too.
Underlying the unrest are two trends.
The ﬁrst is an intra-Oromo power struggle
embodied in the rivalry between Jawar and
Abiy. Jawar, who says he may run in next
year’s election, has loudly criticised the
prime minister’s plan to form a national
party to replace Ethiopia’s ruling multiethnic coalition. On October 22nd Abiy implicitly threatened his younger rival, saying he would “take measures” against media owners with foreign passports (Jawar is
an American citizen) if they fan instability.
Many Oromos are also angry that Abiy has
not met their demands, which include
making Afan Oromo an oﬃcial language of
the federal government. “The government
hasn’t done anything for the Qeerroo,”
complains a young man in Adama.
The second cause is competition between Oromos and Amharas. Since 1995,
when the current constitution established
nine ethnically based regions, politics has
been a battleground between rival nationalisms. For much of the past three decades
the Tigrayans, who are about 6% of the population, ran the show.
Now Oromos are in charge, which has
triggered a backlash among Amharicspeakers and some minorities who fear
that the Oromo nationalism espoused by
Jawar and his followers could lead to marginalisation. Towns in Oromia with large
Amharic-speaking populations including
Adama and Addis Ababa are especially volatile. Even oﬃcials there use dog-whistle
terms such as neftegna (“gun-carrier”)
when talking about Amharic-speakers. In
Adama both sides say that they are arming
themselves in self-defence.
For several days Abiy was silent in the
face of chaos. Since then he has promised
to “weed out” perpetrators. Ending impunity for killers is essential. But so, too, are
talks to defuse tensions, both within
Oromo politics and between the ethnic regions. Jawar says he has asked Abiy to organise a “national convention” to forge a
compromise. With elections fast approaching it is a request the prime minister
would be wise to answer. 7

43

44

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Europe

their worthless savings into hard currency
at the preposterously generous exchange
rate of one Deutschmark to one Ostmark.
More than 1m Ossies took advantage of
their new freedom by moving to the West,
where most thrived. Oﬃcial statistics no
longer counted this group—who were disproportionally young, clever, female and
ambitious—as East Germans. For those
who stayed behind, however, the 30 years
since the fall of the wall have been a mix of
impressive progress, often taken for granted, and sour disappointment.

East Germany

Thirty years after the Wall fell

B E R LI N , B I S CH O F F E R O D E A N D LE I P Z I G

Germans still don’t agree on what reuniﬁcation meant

O

n november 9th 1989, as the Berlin
Wall tumbled, Hans-Joachim Binder
was on night shift at the potash mine in
Bischoﬀerode, a village in the communistruled German Democratic Republic. Mr
Binder, a maintenance worker who had
toiled in the mine for 17 years, had no idea
of the momentous events unfolding
240km (150 miles) to the east. The ﬁrst sign
something was up was when most of his
colleagues disappeared to investigate what
was happening at the border with West
Germany, just ten minutes’ drive away.
Only three returned to complete their shift.
Less than a year later Germany was reunited, capping one of the most extraordi-

nary stories in modern history. Not only
had a communist dictatorship collapsed,
releasing 16m people from the fear of the
Stasi (secret police) and the stultiﬁcation of
censorship. Unlike any other country ever
freed from tyranny, the entire population
of East Germany was given citizenship of a
big, rich democracy. As a grand, if ill-fated,
gesture of welcome the West German chancellor, Helmut Kohl, converted some of
Also in this section
47 Eastern Europe, 30 years on
48 Charlemagne: The magnetic ﬁeld

A price to pay
The harm wrought by four decades of oppression and indoctrination could not be
undone overnight. But a people brought up
in a society where initiative was ruthlessly
crushed had to adapt suddenly to the rigours of capitalism. Unsurprisingly, many
could not. Mr Binder was laid oﬀ. So were
hundreds of thousands of others who previously toiled in safe, dreary and unproductive state-backed jobs. Despite attempts to save it, including large protests
and a hunger strike, the potash mine was
shut down—one of 8,500 companies in the
east privatised or liquidated by the Treuhand, a new government agency. Mr Binder
bounced around in odd jobs for a while,
eventually winding up on Hartz IV, the
stingiest of Germany’s unemployment
beneﬁts, where he languishes today. Like
many East German women, his wife retrained and left for a job in the west. Asked
how he feels about the reuniﬁcation of his
country, he shrugs. “My safe job was gone.
For me, the gdr could have carried on.”
There was no manual to guide the absorption of east into west. The policies that
failed people like Mr Binder were always
going to be subject to ﬁerce dispute. The
surprise, as Germany approaches the 30th
anniversary of the fall of the Wall, is the
speed with which these debates have
roared back into the public sphere. Newspapers and magazines are full of reassessments of the Wiedervereinigung (reuniﬁcation); westerners are lapping up memoirs
and polemics by eastern authors. Never before has Germany debated its reuniﬁcation
with such vigour. Why?
Many observers say the debate grew
louder three or four years ago. The most obvious explanation is therefore the migrant
crisis of 2015-16. Petra Köpping, the integration minister in Saxony, one of the ﬁve
eastern states established at reuniﬁcation,
says that when she tried to explain to her
constituents why the state was helping refugees, some replied: “Integrate us ﬁrst!”
Many easterners resented the resources being devoted to help newcomers when they
felt left behind. They also disliked the labelling of their complaints as racist.
But the refugee crisis merely triggered a 1

The Economist November 2nd 2019
2 deeper shift, says Christian Hirte, the gov-

ernment’s special commissioner for east
Germany. One idea, ﬂoated by Angela Merkel, who as chancellor is east Germany’s
best-known export, is that the east is undergoing something comparable to the experience of West Germany in 1968, when
children forced their parents to account for
their activities in the Nazi period. Now, the
argument runs, young east Germans seek
explanations for what happened to their
parents in the early years of reuniﬁcation.
“The long-term wounds were concealed
because people were absorbed ﬁnding a
place in the new society,” says Steﬀen Mau
of Humboldt University in Berlin. “Perhaps
you need 25 years to realise this.”
This summer Marie-Sophie Schiller, a
young Leipziger who hosts a podcast called
“East—A Guide”, had an “emotional” talk
with her parents about their experiences
after 1990. She was astonished to learn
about their daily hardships and humiliations. Stefan Meyer, an activist who grew
up in East Berlin, remembers watching his
parents’ conﬁdence ebb as they struggled
to ﬁnd their feet in the new country.
After 1990 “the whole software of life
changed” for east Germans, says Markus
Kerber, a bigwig at the interior ministry.
Short-term pain was inevitable. Average labour productivity in the east was 30% of
that in the west. Kohl’s decision to exchange Ostmarks at a 1:1 rate for Deutschmarks made swathes of ﬁrms uncompetitive overnight. Those that survived
struggled with the western rules they had
to import wholesale. By one estimate, 80%
of east Germans at some point found themselves out of work.
Perhaps the Treuhand could have proceeded more gently, some argue today.
Maybe the uniﬁed country should have developed a new constitution rather than
simply extending the western one eastwards. The west might have learned from
the more enlightened aspects of life in the
gdr, such as free child care and encouraging women to work outside the home. Radical parties on left and right take such arguments to a ludicrous extreme, arguing that
reuniﬁcation was the “colonisation” of a
bewildered people by an exploitative west.
Understanding required
Such views tap into a feeling among many
easterners that they have struggled to take
back control of their own destiny. Ms Köpping says east Germans hold barely 4% of
elite jobs in the east. Many rent ﬂats from
westerners, who own much of the eastern
housing stock. “Sometimes east Germans
feel that they’re ruled by others, not themselves,” says Klara Geywitz, a Brandenburger running to lead Germany’s Social
Democrats. Nor have east Germans
stormed the national citadels of power. Almost 14 years after she took oﬃce Mrs Mer-

Europe

kel—and Joachim Gauck, president from
2012-17—remain exceptions rather than a
vanguard. Rarely one to dwell on her origins, Mrs Merkel has lately begun to reﬂect
publicly on the mixed legacy of reuniﬁcation. “We must all…learn to understand
why for many people in east German states,
German unity is not solely a positive experience,” she said on October 3rd.
One obstacle to such understanding is
that Germans view reuniﬁcation diﬀerently. Half of west Germans consider the east a
success. Two-thirds of east Germans disagree. Many westerners were oblivious to
the upheaval their new compatriots endured. “On October 4th 1990 [the day after
reuniﬁcation], after a night of partying I
carried on my life as normal,” says Mr Kerber. “Not a single east German had the same
experience.” In places western stereotypes
of easterners have persisted, the Jammerossi (“complaining easterner”), ungrateful
for the largesse showered on the east after
uniﬁcation, or Dunkeldeutschland (“dark
Germany”), a cold-war term implying backwardness. More recent is the notion of the
east as a cradle of neo-Nazism, bolstered by
the strength there of the far-right Alternative for Germany (afd). Portrayals of the
east in Germany’s national (for which read
western) media have often read like dispatches from an exotic, troubled land,
where the far right are always marching in
the streets or thumping immigrants.
Such accounts risk ignoring the huge
strides made by east Germany since reuniﬁcation. Citizens were liberated from the
humiliations of life in a surveillance state.

They were allowed to choose their leaders,
express their opinions and travel, to west
Germany and beyond. Economically, despite the hardships of the early years, the
east soon began to converge with the west,
and life improved drastically across a range
of measures. Today some east German regions have lower unemployment rates
than western post-industrial regions like
the Saarland or the Ruhr valley. West-east
transfers of close to €2trn ($2.2trn) have reduced the infrastructure gap. (Today they
run at around €30bn a year, mainly in the
form of social-security payments.) Wages
in the east now stand at around 85% of the
level in the west, and the cost of living is
lower. The life-expectancy gap has closed,
the air is cleaner, the buildings smarter. According to Allensbach, a pollster, 53% of
east Germans are content with their personal economic situation, the same ﬁgure as
in the west. “It all worked surprisingly well,
but this story doesn’t ﬂy in the east,” says
Werner Jann of the University of Potsdam.
One of the best
Last year Andrea Boltho, Wendy Carlin and
Pasquale Scaramozzino, three economists,
contrasted east Germany’s post-reuniﬁcation performance favourably with the Mezzogiorno in Italy, where gdp per person remains little over half that of the north.
Perhaps the most apt comparison is with
other parts of Europe that shook oﬀ
communism. East Germany’s per capita
growth has outstripped most other eastern
European countries (see chart on next
page), despite starting from a higher base. 1

Still catching up
Germany

Population
% change 1995-2017
SchleswigHolstein
Bremen

-20 -10

Lower Saxony

10

20

25 30 35 40

Berlin
Potsdam

Former boundary
between East &
West Germany

0

64-year-olds and over
% of total, 2035 forecast

MecklenburgWest Pomerania

Hamburg

SaxonyAnhalt

Berlin
Brandenburg

Saxony
Görlitz
Leipzig
Jena
Dresden
Thuringia Chemnitz

North RhineWestphalia Bischofferode
Hesse
RhinelandPalatinate

45

Underemployment
Germany=100, 2017
50

Saarland
Bavaria
BadenWürttemberg
Munich

Sources: Berlin Institute for Population and Development; Federal Institute for
Research on Building, Urban Affairs and Spatial Development; Federal Statistical
Office; Halle Institute for Economic Research; Professor Hermann Simon

75 100 125 150

“Hidden champions”
Small world-beating
ﬁrms

46

Europe

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Plenty to cheer
GDP per person, 1991=100
300
Poland

250
200

East Germany*

Czech Rep.†

Hungary

Bulgaria
1991

95

2000

05

Sources: Halle Institute for Economic
Research; IMF; World Bank

10

150

100
West
Germany*
50
15

18

*Excludes Berlin
†World Bank est. pre 1993

2 As Richard Schröder, a former East German

dissident, notes, the application of western laws and practices saw oﬀ the threat of
oligarchic corruption that has plagued
many of Germany’s eastern neighbours.
Yet if east Germans do not always appreciate their good fortune, it is because their
reference points have been Hamburg and
Munich, not Bratislava or Budapest. Implicit in the promise of reuniﬁcation was a
pledge that east Germans could ﬁnally enjoy what they had so long envied in the
west. For years they were forced to witness
a lifestyle that remained out of reach, in the
packets of coﬀee and sweets sent by relatives in the west, the western goods on display in Intershop outlets accessible only to
those with hard currency, or the commercials on western television beamed across
the border. In 1990 Chancellor Kohl promised east Germans “blooming landscapes”.
Instead they got deindustrialisation and
mass unemployment. “In 1990 300,000
people came to shout ‘Helmut!’ on Augustusplatz [in Leipzig],” recalls Kurt-Ulrich
Mayer, who helped establish Kohl’s Christian Democratic Union (cdu) in Saxony.
“Four years later he came back, and we
needed umbrellas to protect him from all
the eggs and tomatoes.” Unlike Poles or
Hungarians, east Germans had someone
else to blame when things went wrong.
The convergence between west and east
eventually ground to a halt. Today just 7%
of Germany’s most-valued 500 companies
(and none listed in the dax30 index) are
headquartered in the east. This starves municipalities of tax revenue and contributes
to the east-west productivity gap, which
has stood at around 20% for 20 years. Most
assets liquidated by the Treuhand fell into
western or foreign hands, hindering the
development of an eastern capitalist class.
For many, the best way to get western
lifestyles was to move west. Over one-quarter of east Germans aged 18-30 did so, twothirds of them women. Rural parts of the
east were especially aﬀected. As towns and
villages emptied and tax revenues
slumped, schools were closed, shops shut-

tered and housing blocks demolished. The
mass emigration of youngsters led to a
plummeting number of births. Since 2017
net east-west migration has been roughly
zero, but there has been no growth in the
number of people moving east; the westward exodus has simply fallen to match it.
The east is also much older than the
west. Since 1990 the number of over-60s
there has increased by 1.3m even as the
overall population has fallen by 2.2m. iwh,
a research outﬁt in Halle, thinks the working-age population in the east will fall by
more than a third by 2060. By 2035, 23 of
Germany’s 401 Kreise (administrative districts) will have shrunk by at least a ﬁfth,
says Susanne Dähner at the Berlin Institute
for Population and Development; all of
them are in the east. In some districts,
there will be four funerals for every birth.
Instead of losing people to the west, eastern Germany will lose them to the grave.
The constitutional pledge of “equivalent living conditions” across Germany
thus looks unattainable. The government
tries to help so-called “structurally weak”
regions, in the east as well as the west. But
although investment in infrastructure or
technical universities may help some
towns, it cannot stop the demographic decline in many east German regions.
Coming to terms
The picture is much brighter in some eastern cities. Potsdam, Jena and Dresden have
clusters of industry and tourism as well as
cheap housing; some, like Leipzig (“Hypezig”, to irritated locals), have been booming
for years. The “bacon belt” around Berlin
beneﬁts from the success of the capital, especially as older workers move out to the
suburbs. Yet even as overall emigration to
the west dries up, eastern cities are sucking
educated people away from already struggling small towns and villages. That trend
may continue, as only half of east German
workers work in cities, compared with
three-quarters in the west.
The changes in the east have social, cultural and political consequences which are
The productivity problem
GDP per employee
Germany=100
120
West Germany
100
80
East Germany
(including Berlin)

60
40

1991

95

2000

05

10

Source: Halle Institute for Economic Research, 2019

17

now coming to the fore. Last February
thousands of Dynamo Dresden supporters
at an away game in Hamburg began an unfamiliar chant: “Ost [east], Ost, Ostdeutschland!” A video of the episode went viral,
sparking a lively debate: were the fans expressing a dubious “eastern” variant of militant German nationalism? Or was this a
cheerful reappropriation of an identity
that for so long was taken to connote stupidity and closed-mindedness?
“Identity is key to understanding east
Germany,” says Franziska Schubert, a
thoughtful Green who represents Görlitz in
Saxony’s state parliament. Fully 47% of
east Germans say they identify as easterners before Germans, a far higher proportion
than at the euphoric moment of reuniﬁcation. (The equivalent is true for 22% of
westerners.) Regional identity is hardly abnormal in Germany—ask the Bavarians—
but in the east it can seem grounded in politics as much as culture or tradition.
When Jana Hensel, a writer, recently
gave a talk to a school in her home town of
Leipzig, she was astonished to ﬁnd herself
spending half an hour ﬁelding questions
from teenagers about an Ossiquote (a proposal to give east Germans preference in
public jobs). “More than 25 years after the
end of the gdr, students have become east
German again,” she says. “If we’re not careful, we’ll lose another generation.”
The afd has exploited the power of eastern particularism. Under slogans like “The
east rises up!” the party has scored 20%plus in eastern state elections, most recently in Thuringia on October 27th. There,
and in recent elections in Brandenburg and
Saxony, it was only voters over 60 whose
support for the established parties ensured
that the afd did not come ﬁrst. In Saxony
and Thuringia the afd was the most popular party among under-30s. This is worrying in a part of the country where extremism has found fertile ground. More than
half of Germany’s hate crimes take place in
the east, though it has just 20% of the population and few immigrants.
But eastern identity is not the exclusive
preserve of extremes. Many young easterners simply developed an “Ossi” identity
after encountering ignorance or scorn in
the west. Nor need it be only negative. Matthias Platzeck, a former Brandenburg premier now in charge of a commission for the
30th anniversary of reuniﬁcation, says that
the recent election in his state was the
worst-tempered ever. Nonetheless, he
hopes for the emergence in the east of
healthy self-conﬁdence, built on the back
of success stories—and a new focus on the
many problems that span east and west.
His commission’s informal motto, he says,
is “as little state celebration as necessary, as
much discussion as possible.” And since
the Berlin Wall has gone, no amount of debate will land anyone in jail. 7

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Europe

Eastern Europe

Thirty years of freedom, warts and all

Central and eastern Europeans are mostly happy with their progress since 1989

N

o empire in history has disintegrated
as quickly or as bloodlessly as the Soviet one, in the remarkable year that saw the
fall of the Berlin Wall in November 1989. A
period of carnage in Romania the following
month was the only grisly counter-example. Yugoslavia, never a part of that empire,
followed a tragically diﬀerent path; but for
the rest of central and eastern Europe,
though clearly imperfect, the past 30 years
have been a time of marvels.
Standards of living for most of the region’s peoples have vastly improved, and
most of them know it. New polling by the
Pew Research Centre shows that 81% of
Poles, 78% of Czechs and 55% of Hungarians agree that this is the case. Only Bulgarians on balance take a gloomy view, with
just 32% of them thinking that their standard of living has improved since 1989. Development has been patchy, but for every
depopulating and ageing rustbelt in eastern Europe there is a booming industrial
region, a tech cluster or a services centre
desperate for more workers.
Majorities in every country, mostly very
big ones, approve of the multiparty systems and market economies that have delivered this, as well as their integration into
Western institutions—the eu (from 2004)
and nato (from 1999). Free to travel and
work anywhere in the eu, millions have
done just that. Many who stayed behind,
though, feel left behind. Aniko Takacs,
aged 25, who works at a petrol station on
the Hungarian side of the border with Austria, earns €500 ($550) a month. Her sister,
who does the same job for the same company in Austria, earns €1,500. Countries
with low fertility rates and little immigration are facing steep population declines.
People leave not only because wages are
higher in western Europe but also because
public services are better and corruption
rare. So many eastern European doctors
and nurses have emigrated that access to
good health care has deteriorated in some
places, especially outside big cities.
After three decades of democracy, cynicism about politicians is as widespread as
it is in western Europe. In Slovakia 63% of
people think most elected oﬃcials do not
care what they think, a Pew poll ﬁnds; in
Hungary, 71% and in Bulgaria, 78%. By way
of comparison, the ﬁgures in France and
Britain are 76% and 70%, respectively.
In western Europe and America such
anger at the ruling class has translated into

votes for nationalists, populists, Brexit and
Donald Trump. In Hungary and Poland
those who feel left behind tend to blame
liberalism and the West. Zsuzsanna Szelenyi, who was an anti-communist activist in
Hungary in 1989, says that many of her
compatriots were disappointed after the
fall of communism because they expected
their country “to become like Austria overnight”. It did not, of course, but gdp per person, not to mention life expectancy, has
risen sharply across the region.
Some people have done much better
than others, and not all of them by fair
means. Communist oﬃcials and securocrats who rebranded themselves as democrats had the education and connections to
retain power, make money and proﬁt from
insider-dominated privatisations. The ﬁrst
president of post-communist Czechoslovakia in 1989 was Vaclav Havel, a dissident
playwright. Today the prime minister of
the Czech Republic is Andrej Babis, the second-richest man in the country and a former intelligence service collaborator.
The success of former communists has
rankled. In some countries, populists have
exploited this mood. Ardent supporters of
Poland’s ruling Law and Justice party did
not celebrate the 30th anniversary this year
of the country’s ﬁrst semi-free elections,
which followed the demise of the Kremlinbacked communist dictatorship. The way
they see it is that in 1989 “the pinkos struck
a deal with the reds to keep the reds in power at the expense of the Polish people. Po-

One of several velvet revolutions

land only became genuinely independent
in 2015 when they were voted out and the
true patriots [ie, Law and Justice] were voted in,” sighs Konstanty Gebert, a former
anti-communist activist. This is an odd
way to describe Poland’s rise to prosperity
under a series of post-communist democratic governments.
In Hungary Viktor Orban, a revolutionary anti-communist turned populist prime
minister, uses anti-Western rhetoric to win
support. He talks of defending the common man, downtrodden by the arrogant
liberal elite. Members of this elite imitate
the West, which in turn looks down on
eastern Europeans as country bumpkins,
he suggests. The end of communism was a
liberation, he says, but Hungary also needs
a revival of nationalist and Christian values, which he says he is delivering. He rejects liberal notions of human rights, tolerance and consensus.
Diﬀerent places, diﬀerent values
Eastern Europe remains far less liberal
than the west. Tolerance towards gay people is uneven, and has diminished since
2002 in several countries, polls suggest.
The end of communism unleashed hostility to the region’s large Roma minority,
who remain almost completely unrepresented politically. Hungary’s regime has
undermined the institutions that are supposed to check it, such as the courts and the
media. Poland’s ruling party has tried to
nobble the courts and the civil service.
Despite such setbacks, progress has
been striking since communism ended.
Eastern Europeans have never been as free
or as rich as they are today. Some of the elderly grumble that life was more secure in
the old days, but their memories may be
tinged with regret that they are no longer as
young as they were then. Historians will
describe the communist era in Eastern Europe as four decades of servitude. 7

47

48

Europe

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Charlemagne The magnetic ﬁeld

Britain and the eu may remain closer than the Brexit mire suggests

L

arge, blue and furry, the bulging-eyed Brexit monster has been
spooking Rotterdam for months. Launched ahead of Britain’s
scheduled exit from the eu in March, the monster is the mascot of
government eﬀorts to brace the Netherlands for the rupture. These
have been especially intense at Europe’s busiest port, which handles 40m tonnes of trade with Britain annually. Leaﬂets showing
the monster blocking goods have been distributed to truckers as
part of preparations that include creating giant lorry parks, hiring
hundreds of staﬀ and obliging ﬁrms to register their cargos. Thrice
the Brexit monster has haunted the port. Thrice leaders in Brussels
have agreed to delays as deadlock has dragged on in London. “Effective from today, the buﬀer parking locations for trucks will
again be dismantled,” announced managers, teeth almost audibly
gritted, after the latest postponement on October 28th.
They are not the only ones to feel mucked around. The Dutch
are traditionally among London’s closest eu allies. Though distraught at the Brexit vote—many hoped that Britain would change
its mind—they remained initially well-disposed. Your columnist
accompanied Theresa May, then prime minister, on her inaugural
trip to The Hague in 2016. “My new British colleague!” gushed Mark
Rutte, the Dutch prime minister. “So happy to see you!” The goodwill and hopes for a friendly Brexit have since vanished. Earlier
this year Mr Rutte compared Mrs May to the dismembered knight
in a British comedy sketch who deludedly insists his injuries are
“but a scratch”. He seems to have little more respect for Boris Johnson. “He can hardly hide the fact he thinks the English are stupid,”
observes Theodor Holman, a Dutch commentator.
The eu is exasperated with Britain. The Brexit process has
dragged on longer than expected and consumed time the eu needs
for other things. Mr Rutte joined Emmanuel Macron last week in
pushing for the next delay to be short and, ideally, ﬁnal. Other
leaders prevailed and Britain was given until the end of January.
But patience is wearing thin across the union. On October 29th Donald Tusk, the outgoing president of the European Council,
tweeted ominously: “The eu27 has formally adopted the extension. It may be the last one.” A common refrain in The Hague and
other capitals is that whatever the form of Brexit—soft, hard or nodeal—it would now be better to have done with it. Europeans hope

that Britain’s election in December will deliver this certainty and
fret about another hung parliament or, later, a second Brexit referendum failing to deliver a clear majority for any one course.
“Good riddance” seems to be the prevailing continental mood.
The eu is utterly fed up of the Brexit talks and has stuck to its tough
and united line on Brexit; determined not to let Britain leave with a
deal better than membership that could boost Eurosceptic populists elsewhere. Both of these things can give the impression that
the union is resigned to a weakening of its links with Britain. But it
is not. For the fundamentals go beyond the current political mire.
The Netherlands sums them up. The same Dutch oﬃcials who
moan about Britain also miss its support as part of the eu’s bloc of
frugal, northern eu member states. The Dutch economy remains
closely integrated with the British one, with big ﬁrms like Unilever
and Shell spanning the North Sea and huge ﬂows of goods and services between the coasts. Although the Netherlands beneﬁts from
the exodus of ﬁrms quitting London for cities like Amsterdam and
Rotterdam, its leaders fret about the competitive threat of an oﬀshore Britain that undercuts European regulatory standards. They
also worry about a post-Brexit Britain’s geopolitical divergence
and the spectre of one of Europe’s few serious security powers pivoting towards Donald Trump’s America or China. “The Germans
don’t bring strategic focus, and the French are running their own
show. There is no-one to ﬁll the space left by the Brits,” says Rem
Korteweg of the Clingendael Institute. Similar concerns also
bother European leaders elsewhere. Britain needs a friendly eu
and the eu needs a friendly Britain.
Love the sinner, hate the sin
All of which points to four eventualities that are more likely than
they look in the current tetchy cross-Channel political environment. First, as much fresh despair as a new British request to delay
again in January would create, it is unlikely that the eu or any individual leader in it would want to be held responsible for a no-deal
exit; the eu would probably approve a nerve-grinding fourth extension if the alternative were a disorderly departure. Second, the
eu will do all it can in negotiations about its future relationship
with Britain to keep ties close, adopting a highly conciliatory tone
on security and defence co-operation in particular, and trying hard
to prevent Britain from diverging far on regulation.
Third, for all the continentals’ frustration and the Brexiteers’
hopes of a British rapprochement with America, the two sides may
be pushed back together if Mr Trump is re-elected. Finally, the eu’s
door will never be ﬁrmly closed to a Britain that changes its mind
about Brexit—before or after its departure.
Taken together, these principles point to a conclusion as seemingly improbable as it is inexorable: the momentum does not necessarily favour divergence; perhaps quite the opposite. Britain and
continental Europe may end up closer, in some form, in the future
than looks likely now.
Which is not, by any means, to say that Brexit is a good idea. The
forces of political, security and economic reality pushing Britain
and continental Europe together are all arguments for Britain to
stay in the club and pursue its interests from within. The painful
and inconclusive Brexit process to date has only made those forces
clearer; Brexit has been hard for a reason. Figures on both sides of
the Channel—hard Brexiteers and continental Anglo-sceptics—
may dream of a simple solution, of a “clean break” allowing both
sides to get on and pursue their own separate paths. The reality was
never that simple. It never will be. 7

Britain

The Economist November 2nd 2019

49

Vote ﬂows between 2010 and 2019
2010

2015

2017

2019*

Conservative

Conservative

Labour
Labour

Brexit
Liberal
Democrat

Liberal
Democrat

UKIP

Other

Other

UKIP
SNP

SNP

*Weighted average of selected October polls Sources: British Election Study; The Economist

The centre folds

The missing median voter

Tacking to the centre will do little good in the polarised coming election

“I

met a man polishing his Ford Sierra—
self-employed electrician, dad always
voted Labour,” began Tony Blair when describing the type of voter Labour would be
after, ahead of his 1997 general election victory. It was, Labour’s thinking went, these
middle-of-the-road voters—suburban carwashers in the West Midlands—who held
the keys to Downing Street. Two decades
later, political parties heading into the
election on December 12th will ﬁnd it much
harder to identify the voters who will propel them to power.
For years, politicos held to the “medianvoter theory” beloved by Mr Blair. The idea
was that the party that focused on the concerns of the typical voter would triumph,
while parties that catered to the fringe
would be punished. In this world the centre did more than just hold: it ruled.
These laws of political science have
since come crashing down. Since Brexit
sliced through traditional political alliances, politics has become less of a simple
matter of left versus right. Parties hammer-

ing out manifestos and preparing leaﬂets
for swing seats are thus grappling with
“Schrödinger’s median voter”, argues Marcus Roberts, a pollster at YouGov: they are
unsure whether this mythical ﬁgure is
alive or dead.
If Brexit dominates the coming election, the median voter will be no more.
When it comes to leaving the European Union, voters have polarised. There is little
sign of compromise between the Remain

Also in this section
50 Where now for Brexit?
51 The economy and the election
52 Bagehot: The four Borises

Read more from this week’s Britain section:
Economist.com/Britain

and Leave camps. Fishing in the gap between these two pools of votes will land
few votes, points out Chris Prosser of the
University of Manchester. When elections
are fought on economic issues, between
left and right, political parties can pick a
point in the middle and not go far wrong.
By contrast, “identity politics do not have
give and take,” says Geoﬀrey Evans of Oxford University. It is relatively easy to compromise on, say, the level of tax. It is harder
to do so on notions such as sovereignty.
As voters are polarising, so are mps.
More than 50 are preparing to stand down
in December, including many Tory former
Remainers. Most of their successors will be
fully paid-up Leavers.
This division of politics into two opposing camps has been dubbed Ulsterisation.
In Northern Ireland, most people vote
along sectarian lines. Irish nationalists
will not carefully weigh up the economic
policy of the Democratic Unionist Party before casting their vote. Nor will ardent
unionists consider the merits of Sinn
Fein’s social policy. If Brexit divisions persist, British politics could start looking
more Northern Irish, with Remain and
Leave the new sectarian divide (Remainers
have already discovered a love of marches).
Smaller parties have seized on this
strategy. The Liberal Democrats are standing on a policy of revoking Article 50 and
cancelling Brexit altogether. At the other
end of the political see-saw sits the Brexit 1

50

Britain

2 Party, which has pledged to quit the eu

without a deal.
In a Brexit-dominated election, few
swing voters will switch between these two
opposing groups. But plenty of switching
could go on within them, says Chris Hanretty of Royal Holloway, University of London. Recent years have seen unprecedented political promiscuity, as Remainers
have joined the Lib Dems and Leavers the
Brexit Party (see chart on previous page). In
this sense, the median voters have not disappeared, but fragmented: parties can still
chase the centre ground, but only within
the conﬁnes of their own sectarian group
of Remainers or Leavers.
Not all are convinced that Brexit identities are here to stay. British politics has
been marked by extreme volatility of late.
Only half of voters backed the same party in
the three elections between 2010 and 2017,
according to the British Election Study. It is
not inevitable, then, that Brexit will be the
issue that cements hitherto ﬂoating voters
into one part of the political spectrum, argues Mr Roberts of YouGov. Talk of an election has already led to a sharp drop in voters highlighting Brexit as the main issue
facing Britain, with other topics, such as
the health service, rising in salience.
Others think the median voter has not
gone missing but is simply being misidentiﬁed. Labour has stopped triangulating on
the economy, instead leaping leftward with
promises of a much bigger state (see Briefing). The party’s bet is that the median voter is in fact perfectly happy with its leftwing economic policy.
The Tories have taken a similar approach to social issues. A reluctance to
compromise runs through their policies on
law and order, which are unapologetically
illiberal. The party is betting that the median voter is alive and well, and simply more
socially conservative than previously
thought. What looks like a failure of median-voter theory is often a failure of commentators to spot where the true median
lies, argues James Morris, another pollster.
Despite their sketchy record on the topic, wonks are still on the hunt for the new
Mr Median. Past elections have seen parties target archetypes such as “Mondeo
Man”, “Worcester Woman” and “Pebbledash People”. The 2019 contest has already
coughed up “Workington Man”, a rugbyleague-loving, Leave-voting northerner
who, by coincidence, holds many of the
same views as Onward, the Tory think-tank
that discovered him. Perhaps Workington
Man will yet hold the balance of power. But
in the polarised campaign ahead, parties
seem more intent on rallying their own
side than on venturing into the increasingly treacherous middle ground. 7
Follow our live poll tracker online at
economist.com/britain2019

The Economist November 2nd 2019
Brexit and the election

Of deadlines and
cliﬀ edges
Brexit is put oﬀ yet again. But the risk
of no-deal has not gone away

I

t was a target date to meet, “do or die”. Yet
though Boris Johnson said he would
rather be dead in a ditch than extend the
October 31st Brexit deadline, this week he
endorsed an eu decision to push the date
back to January 31st 2020. The focus on the
election called for December 12th may have
disguised this humiliating climbdown, but
it is sure to be highlighted by opponents in
the campaign.
For all the government’s (now paused)
£100m ($120m) publicity campaign to prepare for Brexit on October 31st, it has been
clear for weeks that postponement was
likely. Mr Johnson surprised many by securing a new deal on October 17th. But the
chances of its being ratiﬁed in time for an
orderly Brexit at the end of the month were
always small. Indeed, Labour’s leader, Jeremy Corbyn, refused to back an election
because of the risk of no-deal if there were
no extension. Only with no-deal oﬀ the table did he deem an election acceptable.
The eu’s decision was motivated in part
by the likelihood of such an election. Yet
the new deadline is uncomfortably close.
Despite winning parliamentary approval
on October 22nd for the second reading of a
new withdrawal agreement bill by fully 30
votes, Mr Johnson chose to pull the legislation in favour of his early election. Yet
when the new parliament meets shortly
before Christmas there will be barely 20 sitting days left to get the bill through before
January 31st.
What happens will depend, of course,
on the result. If Mr Johnson wins a majority, he will push ahead quickly with the bill.
But if his majority is small, he may still run
into diﬃculties, especially with possible
substantive amendments. It is worth recalling that in October 1971, mps voted by a
majority of 112 to approve the principle of
joining what became the eu. Yet less than
four months later the margin for the subsequent European Communities Act had
shrunk to eight votes.
If Mr Johnson does not win a majority,
the withdrawal agreement presumably
falls. Labour wants to renegotiate his deal
and put it to the people in a new referendum, with Remain as an option on the ballot. The Liberal Democrats propose simply
to revoke the Article 50 Brexit request,
though they would be likely to support a
referendum if they cannot achieve this. So
would most other small parties.
Yet although an election that does not

produce a Tory majority is now the clearest
route to a second referendum, it is hardcore Remainers who seem most glum.
Their expectation that Mr Johnson would
ﬁnd it impossible to get a new Brexit deal
has been dashed. So have their hopes of
getting a “People’s Vote” before an election.
It was ﬁtting that the campaign for such a
vote chose this week to indulge in a bout of
bloodletting and sackings redolent of the
splits in Monty Python’s “Life of Brian” between the diﬀerent factions ﬁghting for the
liberation of the people of Judea.
The bigger point about Brexit is that,
contrary to Mr Corbyn’s claim, no-deal is
not oﬀ the table. It is not just that the January 31st deadline, which the eu will be reluctant to extend again, is close. It is also
that, even if the withdrawal agreement bill
becomes law, new deadlines will loom.
Talks on a future trade relationship with
the eu cannot realistically begin until
March. Such a complex trade negotiation
usually takes many years. And since it will
no longer be conducted as part of the Article 50 divorce, but rather under Article 218,
any deal will have to be ratiﬁed by all eu national and several regional parliaments, including Wallonia’s.
It looks highly unrealistic to expect this
to be done by the end of the transition period, which broadly freezes the status quo,
in December 2020. That period can be extended to December 2022, but a request to
do this must be made before July 1st. So
within a few months, the prime minister
will again face a familiar, agonising choice:
does he ask for an extension of the deadline, or does he let Britain leave the eu with
no deal at the end of 2020? Mr Johnson
makes much of his promise to “get Brexit
done” after the election. Yet for most of
2020 Brexit will remain top of the political
agenda, no matter who wins. 7

People’s Front of Remain

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Britain

Economic growth and the election

The zombie economy

Britain’s economy is holding up well—for now

I

n “resident evil 2”, a horror videogame released earlier this year, shooting
a zombie does not necessarily kill it. Even
after a headshot, the beast may continue to
lumber forward in pursuit of the player’s
brains. The British economy has behaved
in a similar fashion since the Brexit referendum of 2016. Many pundits had predicted that the uncertainty caused by the vote
to leave would send Britain into recession,
with unemployment shooting up and
wages collapsing. But the economy has
plodded on. That will work to the advantage of the incumbent Conservative Party
at the election on December 12th.
Smoothing through quarterly data,
since the referendum the economy has
grown at a quarterly rate of about 0.4%
(1.5% on an annualised basis). That is far
from impressive by historical standards.
Surprisingly enough, however, it is about
as fast as the average growth rate across the
g7 over the period; President Donald
Trump’s trade war has dented global economic growth. And Britain’s labour market
has strengthened. The unemployment rate
has continued to decline, and now sits
around a four-decade low of under 4%. The
share of gdp accruing to workers in the
form of wages, salaries and employmentrelated beneﬁts is edging up.
Two main factors are responsible for
this slow but steady performance. For
much of the post-referendum period con-

It’s the economy, stupid
Britain, real wages, whole economy
% change on a year earlier
General
elections

Gordon Brown Theresa May Election
loses
loses majority
called
David Cameron wins

4
2
0
-2
-4
-6

2008

10

12

14

16

18 19

Source: ONS

sumers have been doggedly upbeat. Analysis last year from economists at the Bank of
England suggested that, since the referendum, spending by Leave voters had grown
more quickly than that of Remainers. The
tight labour market has supported consumption spending. So has borrowing.
Since the referendum, credit-card debt has
grown by about 8% a year, a high rate by
post-crisis standards. In early 2017 households’ savings ratio (ie, the share of their
disposable income which they were setting
aside) fell to its lowest level since 1963.
In recent months growth in consumption spending has slowed—perhaps households became nervous as Brexit day ap-

peared to be just around the corner. Yet
another source of demand has taken its
place. Breaking from its deserved reputation for ﬁscal austerity, the Conservative
government has turned on the spending
taps. A spending review in September
promised £13bn ($16.7bn, or 0.6% of gdp) of
extra funding for public services and investment. In July doctors and dentists got
an above-inﬂation pay rise. A four-year
cash-terms freeze on most working-age
beneﬁts will end in April. The budget deﬁcit (ie, the diﬀerence between tax receipts
and government spending) is once again
increasing, having been on a downward
path since 2010.
The rise in living standards comes at a
useful time for Boris Johnson, the prime
minister. In Britain’s three most recent
general elections, incumbents did well
when real wages were rising smartly, and
badly when they were not (see chart). With
hindsight, it is clear that Theresa May
picked pretty much the worst possible time
to go to the polls: in June 2017, the month
her snap election was held, real wages fell
by 0.5%, largely the result of higher consumer-price inﬂation caused by the depreciation of the pound. This time, by contrast, Labour’s contention that the British
economy needs a complete overhaul may
seem less compelling.
I will feast on your Keynes
Like a wounded zombie, however, the British economy has not escaped unscathed.
One paper from academics at Cambridge
University suggests that uncertainty over
trade policy has dented export prospects.
Fearful of future tariﬀs on exports, many
ﬁrms have pulled back from supplying foreign markets. That in part explains why,
despite the fall in the value of the pound,
which should make Britain’s wares more
competitive in foreign markets, there is little sign of an export boom. Meanwhile, recent research from Nick Bloom of Stanford
University, and colleagues, suggests that
Brexit-related uncertainty has held back
business investment—which, in real
terms, is no higher than it was at the time of
the referendum.
Low levels of capital spending by ﬁrms
will weigh on Britain’s productivity, which
already has barely grown in the past decade. That will hold back increases in real
wages. And the drag from Brexit will become much more noticeable when it actually happens. Over the long run Mr Johnson’s Brexit deal would reduce incomes by
about 6% compared with what they would
otherwise have been—only a marginally
better outcome than the estimated cost of
leaving the eu with no deal at all. The paradox of the forthcoming election is that the
prime minister is likely to reap the rewards
of an unexpectedly strong economy, even
as he promises to hobble it. 7

51

52

Britain

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Bagehot The four faces of Boris Johnson

Player, gambler, Machiavelli or piglet?

B

oris johnson at last has his rendezvous with the great British
public. Mr Johnson was installed in Downing Street in July by
an electorate of just 160,000 Conservative Party members. Now he
has to prove himself before a larger and more critical audience.
This audience will be bombarded with promises and propaganda
over the next six weeks. But Mr Johnson’s unusual probationary
period in Downing Street gives them a chance to judge him by his
record. What have we learned about the prime minister’s political
character and leadership style so far?
One thing is certain: he has deﬁed expectations, both positive
and negative. Mr Johnson was frequently presented as a jovial ﬁgure—a clown or Bertie Wooster-style buﬀoon. He liked to make
people laugh. He laced his language with eccentric phrases. He
created an impression of aﬀable disorganisation. But though he
can still make people smile, he is much more focused and disciplined than anyone expected. The iron has entered his soul.
A more appropriate image than a clown is that of a rugby captain. A fan of the game, who played for his college at Oxford, the
stockily built Mr Johnson has brought many of the techniques of
the sport to the political ﬁeld. He has demonstrated a single-mindedness: everything he does is about getting the ball over the line.
He has shown no hesitation about altering the composition of his
team according to his changing game plan, kicking 21 Tories out of
the party when they deﬁed him and then re-admitting ten of them
when the general election knocked. And he has kept his eye on the
clock, using timetables and deadlines to keep the game moving—
though he must regret installing “Brexit clocks” in both Downing
Street and Conservative Party headquarters set to hit zero on October 31st, a deadline that he has now missed.
More recently Mr Johnson has applied the same drive that he
applied to Brexit to securing a general election, ﬁxating on a particular date (December 12th) and threatening to go on strike if the opposition parties didn’t bend to his will. This has produced some
criticism about moving the goal posts. Philip Hammond, a former
chancellor, accused Mr Johnson of “blocking Brexit” in order to
pursue a wider objective of shifting the Tory party to the right. That
is not quite right. Mr Johnson calculates that he can’t get his Brexit
deal through the current House of Commons without endless

amendments and delays. He also realises that his deal is only the
opening salvo in prolonged negotiations which will shape what
sort of Brexit Britain ends up with.
A second image is that of a greased piglet. This comes courtesy
of David Cameron, Mr Johnson’s junior at Eton by two years and senior in Downing Street by nine, who recently told an audience in
Yorkshire that “the thing about the greased piglet is that he manages to slip through other people’s hands where mere mortals fail.”
Mr Johnson has broken an ever-lengthening list of pledges. He
pledged to deliver Brexit “do or die” by October 31st, only to discover that he couldn’t. He promised to be “dead in a ditch” rather than
send a letter asking for an extension, only to send exactly such a
letter. He so alienated his colleagues that he reduced his majority
from plus one to minus 45. But the grease works. Mr Johnson either wriggles through loopholes (for example, by refusing to sign
said letter) or else shifts the blame expertly to anyone but himself.
“It’s Parliament’s fault, it’s the opposition’s fault, it’s the Benn act,
it’s Germany, it’s Ireland,” proclaimed an exasperated Sir Keir
Starmer, Labour’s Brexit spokesman, trying to deﬁne the prime
minister’s slippery style.
The third image is that of Machiavelli. Mr Johnson employs all
the great Florentine’s tactics. He treats his opponents as enemies
of the people. He throws his allies under the bus as soon as they
cease to be useful (the decision to sacriﬁce the Tories’ long-standing ally, the Democratic Unionist Party, in order to solve the problem on the Irish border will go down in the annals of realpolitik).
He uses his clown’s mask to great eﬀect to conceal his Machiavellian side, saying toxic things one moment and telling a good joke
the next. He breaks the rules of politics in ways that shock old
hands such as Sir John Major. He persuaded the queen to prorogue
Parliament on spurious grounds and was subsequently slapped
down by the Supreme Court. And he employs a hatchet man in the
form of Dominic Cummings, his chief adviser, who happily takes
the blame for some of Downing Street’s more extreme moves. Mr
Cummings’s enthusiasm for using privileged brieﬁngs in order to
turn the press corps into an ampliﬁer has aroused the ire of one of
Fleet Street’s most experienced journalists, Peter Oborne, who
wrote a furious article arguing that Downing Street is ﬁlling the
press with lies, smears and character assassinations. The Downing
Street machine continues with business as usual while Mr Oborne
has given up his political column in the Daily Mail.
Double or nothing
The last image is that of the gambler. Mr Johnson has spent his career making lucky bets—lucky for him, that is, not the rest of the
country. He made his career as a journalist betting that the public
wanted bureaucracy-bashing stories from Brussels, rather than
the usual dutiful fare. He became prime minister by betting on
Leave. Now he is making yet another gamble, which may free him
from today’s imprisonment by Parliament but could easily install
Labour’s socialist leader, Jeremy Corbyn, in Downing Street. The
Tories go into this election facing big losses in Scotland and the Remain-voting south of England. They have to overcome powerful
tribal ties to Labour in Wales, the Midlands and the north in order
to make up for these losses. Moreover, Labour is a much more impressive electoral machine than most Tories seem to think. Mr
Corbyn already has a new spring in his step and the party is bombarding the internet with clever ads. Even the luckiest of gamblers
sometimes loses—and even the greasiest of piglets sometimes
ends up in the abattoir. 7

The Economist November 2nd 2019

International

Credulity and politics

This article is full of lies

You really can fool some of the people, all of the time

I

n 2001 jonathan haidt, a psychologist
at New York University, published a paper in Psychological Review delightfully entitled “The Emotional Dog and its Rational
Tail”. He argued that when people make
moral decisions, they are inﬂuenced by
emotion, or what might also be termed intuition. They may think they are weighing
evidence but in fact their decisions are
made in the blink of an eye. The reasons
they give afterwards merely reﬂect these
emotions, like a dog wagging its tail.
Others have taken similar views. “Reason is, and ought only to be, the slave of the
passions,” wrote David Hume, a philosopher of the Scottish Enlightenment, in
1739. But the lessons of Mr Haidt’s essay are
particularly apt at a time when lying has
come to deﬁne politics more than usual.
Dictatorships have always been built on
lies: that Kim Jong Un is a demigod, that
nothing much happened on June 4th 1989
in Tiananmen Square. The Soviet Union
called its main newspaper Pravda
(“Truth”). That was a lie, of course.

Politicians in democracies have always
mangled the truth: denying aﬀairs and
downplaying the ill eﬀects of their policies.
What is new is the degree to which voters
are prepared to back leaders who seem to
revel in their mendacity.
Misleaders of the free world
Boris Johnson’s ﬁrst notable act was to be
ﬁred from a newspaper for making up a
quote. Yet he is Britain’s prime minister. India said that it had downed a Pakistani f-16
ﬁghter jet over Kashmir in February. Facing
an election, Narendra Modi, India’s prime
minister, said his country had taught Pakistan a lesson. A subsequent inspection of
Pakistan’s aircraft by American oﬃcials
showed that none was missing (India
maintained its position).
As for President Donald Trump, whole
websites are devoted to his truthlessness.
On one, Glenn Kessler of the Washington
Post fact-checks presidential statements
and awards scores: three Pinocchios for
“signiﬁcant factual errors” and four for

53

“whoppers” (Mr Trump’s claims about Ukraine and Hunter Biden ﬁt into the whopper category). As of October 9th, the president had made 13,435 false or misleading
statements while in oﬃce. Rather than
grapple with what is true and what is false,
Twitter said on October 30th it would ban
political ads (Facebook has so far declined
to the same).
Yet their duplicity seems to cost politicians little, if anything, in electoral support. Surveys by YouGov, a pollster, put Mr
Johnson’s Conservative Party in the lead in
the election due in December. Mr Trump’s
job-approval rating, at 43%, is low but only
one point below what it was when he took
oﬃce. No one takes for granted that he will
lose next year’s presidential election.
Why isn’t lying more damaging? One
possibility is that lying on a Trumpian
scale is so unusual—so frequent, shameless and easily falsiﬁed—that people do not
know how to react. In tests, between twothirds and three-quarters of people say
they never lie; most of the rest claim to lie
fewer than ﬁve times a day. It is hard to
comprehend someone who goes so far beyond normal, occasional deceitfulness.
Another explanation is that people trust
leaders for whom they have voted, whatever those people say. A recent study by two
researchers at Brigham Young University,
Michael Barber and Jeremy Pope, examined
whether voters are loyal to an individual
leader or whether they support leaders who 1

54

International

2 represent the policies and outlook they

themselves espouse. Because Mr Trump
has abandoned so many traditional Republican policies, such as support for free trade
and suspicion of Russia, the researchers
concluded that it is personal: those who
still call themselves Republicans support
Mr Trump because of who he is, not what
he stands for. And if personal loyalty
trumps ideology, then voters may back a
politician even if he does not tell the truth.
Indeed, Mr Trump’s supporters may
even relish his deceits. If you believe that
all politicians are liars, those outraged by
Mr Trump’s falsehoods are hypocrites. The
ire of his opponents and members of the
press, such as Mr Kessler, at his lies is taken
chieﬂy as evidence of his cocking a snook
at the swampy establishment.
But even in daily life, without the particular pressures of politics, people ﬁnd it
hard to spot liars. Tim Levine of the University of Alabama, Birmingham, has spent
decades running tests that allow participants (apparently unobserved) to cheat. He
then asks them on camera if they have
played fair. He asks others to look at the recordings and decide who is being forthright about cheating and who is covering it
up. In 300 such tests people got it wrong
about half of the time, no better than a random coin toss. Few people can detect a liar.
Even those whose job is to conduct interviews to dig out hidden truths, such as police oﬃcers or intelligence agents, are no
better than ordinary folk.
Evolution may explain credulity. In a
forthcoming book, “Duped”, Mr Levine argues that evolutionary pressures have
adapted people to assume that others are
telling the truth. Most communication by
most people is truthful most of the time, so
a presumption of honesty is usually justiﬁed and is necessary to keep communication eﬃcient. If you checked everything
you were told from ﬁrst principles, it
would become impossible to talk. Humans
are hard-wired to assume that what they
hear is true—and therefore, says Mr Levine,
“hard-wired to be duped”.
So strong is that instinct that people
suspend their critical faculties when given
orders by a superior. The point was made
by one of the most famous experiments in
psychology, the “obedience to authority”
test conducted by Stanley Milgram in 1961.
Subjects were (falsely) told that they were
taking part in a test that required them to
administer electric shocks to another participant (who was an actor). As the test proceeded, they were willing to give shocks so
large that the impact would have been fatal
had they been real. The normal interpretation is that people are willing to behave unconscionably if they can tell themselves
they were merely “following orders”. But
Mr Levine raises another possibility: they
may well have had doubts that the experi-

The Economist November 2nd 2019

ment was real, but not suﬃcient to override what he calls the “truth default”.
Fake news may be exacerbating people’s
inbuilt gullibility. A study published last
year in Science, a journal, concluded that
“falsehood diﬀused signiﬁcantly farther,
faster, deeper and more broadly than the
truth” and that this eﬀect was especially
strong for fake political news. Fake news
provides voters with a smorgasbord of facts
and lies from which to pick and choose.
In politics, however, these explanations
cannot be the whole story. At the heart of
the lying-politician paradox is an uncomfortable fact: voters appear to support liars
more than they believe them. Mr Trump’s
approval rating is 11 points higher than the
share of people who trust him to tell the
truth. A third of British voters view Mr
Johnson favourably but only a ﬁfth think
he is honest. Voters believe in their leaders
even if they do not believe them. Why?
The answer starts with the primacy of
intuitive decision-making. ln 2004 Drew
Westen of Emory University in Atlanta put
partisan Republicans and Democrats into a
magnetic-resonance-imaging scanner and
found that lying or hypocrisy by the other
side lit up areas of the brain associated with
rewards; lies by their own side lit up areas
associated with dislike and negative emotions. At no point did the parts of the brain
associated with reason show any response
at all. If voters’ judgments are rooted in
emotion and intuition, facts and evidence
are likely to be secondary.
The most important consequence of the
domination of intuition is the pervasiveness of conﬁrmation bias—the tendency to
seek out and interpret information that
conﬁrms what you already think. It is a feature of reasoning, not a bug. There are few
better illustrations than Americans’ news-

gathering habits. To oversimplify, Democrats read the New York Times; Republicans
watch Fox News. A Pew poll in 2018 found
that 82% of Democrats thought the media
perform a useful “watchdog” role of keeping politicians from doing things they
shouldn’t. Only 38% of Republicans
agreed. By contrast, ﬁve years earlier, when
Barack Obama was president, the ﬁgures
were 67% and 69% respectively.
A new version of conﬁrmation bias is
“identity-protective cognition”, argues
Dan Kahan of Yale Law School. This says
that people process information in a way
that protects their self-image and the image they think others have of them. For example, those who live surrounded by climate-change sceptics may avoid saying
anything that suggests humankind is altering the climate, simply to avoid becoming
an outcast. A climate sceptic encircled by
members of Extinction Rebellion might do
the same thing in reverse. As people become more partisan, more issues are being
taken as markers of the kind of person you
are: in Britain, the country’s membership
of the European Union; in America, guns,
trade, even American football. All give rise
to the acceptance of bias.
Deceit of power
Thomas Gilovich of Cornell shows how
fake news, cognition bias and assuming
that people are telling the truth interact to
make it easier to believe lies. If you want to
believe a thing, he argues (that is, a lie that
supports your preconceived ideas), you ask
yourself: “Can I believe it?” A single study
or comment online is usually enough to
give you permission to hold this belief,
even if it is bogus. But if you do not want to
believe something (because it contradicts
your settled opinions) you are more likely
to ask: “Must I believe it?” Then, one apparently reputable statement on the other side
will satisfy you. That may be why so many
climate sceptics manage to cling to their
beliefs in the teeth of overwhelming evidence to the contrary. Activists point out
that 99% of scientists believe the Earth is
warming up because of human actions. But
people who doubt the reality of climate
change listen to the other 1%.
You might expect (or hope) that
thoughtful people would be more amenable to the force of fact-based evidence than
most. Alas, no. According to David Perkins
of Harvard University, the brighter people
are, the more deftly they can conjure up
post-hoc justiﬁcations for arguments that
back their own side. Brainboxes are as likely as anyone else to ignore facts which support their foes. John Maynard Keynes, a
(famously intelligent) British economist,
is said to have asked someone: “When the
facts change, I change my mind. What do
you do, sir?” If they were honest, most
would reply: “I stick to my guns.” 7

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Business

55

Also in this section
57 Egghead-hunting at Stanford
57 AMD chips away at Intel
58 Bartleby: Happy ﬁrms
60 Schumpeter: The spirit of Carlos

Management education

The next business revolution

B O STO N A N D P A LO A LTO

American business schools are reinventing the mba. About time

O

n a visit to New York in October Marc
Benioﬀ, boss of Salesforce, compared
Facebook to cigarettes and backed a corporate tax hike to deal with homelessness
in San Francisco. If badmouthing a fellow
technology giant and cheering the taxman
were not heterodox enough for a billionaire entrepreneur, Mr Benioﬀ laid into
American management education. It “programmes” students to favour proﬁt over
the public good. This, he noted, is out of
step with “the new capitalism”.
Many deans concur. “We need our students to be thoughtful about the role of
business in society, particularly at a moment in time when capitalism is coming
under attack,” says William Boulding of
Duke’s Fuqua School of Business. Nitin
Nohria of Harvard Business School (hbs)
reports how younger alumni and incoming
classes want “the place of work to reﬂect
purpose and values”. Jonathan Levin of
Stanford’s Graduate School of Business

(gsb) talks of business schools’ responsibility to recognise the societal consequences of corporate actions. “Corporations, their leaders and owners need to act
to restore trust,” he intones.
America’s business schools still dominate our annual ranking of the world’s top
mbas (see table on next page). But the industry is being shaken up. According to the
Graduate Management Admission Council
(gmac), an industry association, American
mba programmes received 7% fewer applicants this year than last. Nearly three-quarters of full-time, two-year mba programmes reported declines from coast to
coast. Not even the most illustrious ones
were spared: hbs (located in Boston) and
Stanford’s gsb (in Palo Alto) both saw applications dip by 6% or so. Schools face growing competition from overseas and online
programmes—and, as Mr Benioﬀ’s critique
implies, questions over hidebound curriculums. “We’re being disrupted left, right

and centre,” confesses Susan Fournier,
dean of Boston University’s Questrom
School of Business.
When management education boomed
in the 1960s, American schools taught
mostly American students. As the world
economy globalised in the 1980s and 1990s,
so too did American curriculums and student bodies. Sangeet Chowﬂa, who heads
gmac, now discerns a “third wave”: improved schools outside America are letting
foreign students study closer to home (and
future employers). Many oﬀer cheaper
one-year mbas, popular in Europe but uncommon across the pond. Whereas three
in four two-year mba programmes in
America saw declines in overseas applicants in the latest application cycle, numbers applying to Asian business schools
rose by 9% from 2017 to 2018. A recent uptick in America’s anti-immigrant sentiment is accelerating the trend.
Americans, too, are cooling on mbas.
More than half of American schools report
fewer domestic applicants. Soaring tuition
costs, which have far outpaced inﬂation,
put them oﬀ as much as they do foreigners.
A top-notch mba will set you back more
than $200,000 (including living costs).
Even with ﬁnancial aid, many students are
saddled with $100,000 debts at graduation.
The opportunity cost of forgoing two years’
worth of paycheques is higher when the 1

56

Business

2 economy is booming and labour markets

are tight. Weak demand has caused the
number of full-time mba programmes in
America to fall by nearly a tenth between
2014 and 2018, according to the Association
to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business,
another industry body.
Geoﬀrey Garrett, dean of the Wharton
School, at the University of Pennsylvania,
believes that a ﬂight to quality is beneﬁting
top institutions like his—and their graduates. Add non-wage compensation and
alumni often recoup their investments in a
few years. Not counting signing bonuses,
the average base salary for graduates of the
ﬁve American schools with the highest
earning potential was $139,000.
Consultancies and investment banks,
historically the keenest mba recruiters,
claim their appetite for holders of elite degrees has not diminished. A prestigious
mba “puts a ﬂoor on your career”, explains
Kostya Simonenko, a 28-year-old consultant on leave from Oliver Wyman (which is
paying for his course at Columbia Business
School). Silicon Valley, which used to dismiss mbas as overpaid know-nothings, has
become less hostile. As startups grow into
large corporations, they need managers to
help run things, not just software engineers to run code. A survey of recruiters by
gmac this year found that 80% of technology companies planned to hire mbas, on a
par with consultancies (82%) and ﬁnancial
ﬁrms (77%).
Even the ﬁnest schools, though, are not
sheltered from the forces buﬀeting business education. Global competition and
new technology platforms enable a lower
cost structure for the delivery of high-quality courses. This forces “a reckoning of the
mba value proposition”, says Ms Fournier.
As part of that reckoning, Questrom has
teamed up with edx, a big online-education ﬁrm, to oﬀer a full mba degree online
for just $24,000, less than a third of the
cost of its on-campus equivalent. Better to
cannibalise yourself than let others do it,
as Ms Fournier puts it. mit’s Sloan School
of Management provides similarly aﬀordable bundles of online courses, dubbed
MicroMasters, in areas like supply-chain
management and ﬁnance. These grant certiﬁcates but the credits will be honoured if
a student one day decides to pursue a full
degree. 2u, an online-education platform,
is introducing deferred-tuition schemes
for some hybrid mba degrees. It will share
the upfront costs with its business-school
partners; students will pay only when they
get a job.
It is not just how mba courses are taught
that is changing. So, too, is what they teach.
Many budding woke capitalists agree with
Mr Benioﬀ—and demand to be taught business beyond the primacy of shareholder
value. At Stanford Luisa Gerstner, a millennial mba student from Germany, notes that

The Economist November 2nd 2019

sustainable capitalism plays a more central
role in European schools. Julia Osterman,
her American classmate, laments how, despite some social, environmental and ethical topics in its curriculum, core classes are
still “too Finance 101”.
Some of their professors are not so sure.
One greybeard at hbs estimates that a third
of its faculty (and many older alumni) view
the embrace of cuddly “stakeholder capitalism” as an unrigorous sop to political
correctness. It certainly introduces lots of
grey areas, Mr Boulding concedes. But, he
says, schools can at least provide students
with “frameworks for making choices”. A
new course at Duke is entitled “Capitalism
and Common Purpose in a World of Diﬀerences”. hbs has made “Leadership and Corporate Accountability” (which delves into
“the responsibilities of business to the
broader system in which it is embedded”) a
required ﬁrst-year course, with case studies weighing up things like the morality of
looking beyond ﬁnancial metrics at Japan’s
Government Pension Investment Fund.
Recoding academies
Curriculums are being transformed in less
lofty ways, too. Employers, who partly or
wholly bankroll half of all executive education, which earns elite schools between
$100m and $150m a year, want it to impart
technical skills. In response, deans such as
Costis Maglaras, the newish head of Columbia Business School (and an engineer
by training), are bolting courses on data,
analytics and programming onto the time-

table. As their popularity rises, they may
displace stodgier subjects. Columbia used
to oﬀer several courses on debt markets but
now oﬀers perhaps one each academic
year. Meanwhile, students have ﬂocked to
coding classes. The idea is not to turn business types into boﬃns but to prepare them
to work with and manage technical staﬀ,
says Mr Maglaras. A recruiter for a big consultancy aﬃrms that tech-savvy mbas are
“very attractive”.
Richard Lyons, former dean of the Haas
Business School at the University of California, Berkeley, sees the future in providing lifelong professional education as a
service: “Give alumni know-how on demand, searchable online.” Scott DeRue,
dean of the University of Michigan’s Ross
School of Business, is giving alumni tuition-free access to executive education.
“The new stuﬀ will come from insurgents,
not the big mba schools,” thinks John Kao, a
management guru who formerly taught at
hbs. He wants training benchmarks and
standardised transcripts to make skills
portable and universally recognised.
At hbs, home to perhaps the most hallowed mba, Mr Nohria accepts that the
market for its traditional oﬀering is shrinking. In a sign of the times, his school has
frozen tuition fees. He sees a dramatic expansion for “unbundlers” of online education, who “separate knowing, doing and
being”. In time, he says, they will converge
with “bundlers” like hbs. Far from collapsing, he reckons, management education
will the richer for it. 7

Which MBA? The Economist’s ranking of full-time MBA programmes
2019

Graduates
Average
new
salary, $

Change
on 2018

1
2

In a job
within
3 mths, %

Annual
tuition
fee, $

Students
Average
work
Duration, experience,
months
years

Average
GMAT*
score

US 131,893

84

96

72,000

21

5

731

US 139,339

59

95

73,440

21

5

731

France 127,410

153

93

66,690†

16

6

691

21

5

732

– Chicago (Booth)
+1 Harvard

3 +10 HEC Paris

Course
Increase
on preMBA
salary, %

4

-2 Northwestern (Kellogg) US 128,415

72

94

73,404

5

-1 Pennsylvania (Wharton) US 142,701

22

98

81,378

20

5

732

6

+2 UCLA Anderson

US 121,843

94

90

64,292

22

5

716

7

+4 California at Berkeley

US 127,632

72

94

61,422

19

5

726

21

4

732

8

-3 Stanford

US 145,559

68

95

73,062

9

-2 Michigan (Ross)

US 126,500

104

94

68,646

20

5

720

Spain 122,284

124

96

107,295†

19

6

686

US 127,874

99

96

70,000

22

6

704

21

5

722

10
11
12

-4 IESE
+4 Duke (Fuqua)
– Dartmouth (Tuck)

13 +11 SDA Bocconi
14
15

+6 Cornell ( Johnson)
-5 Columbia

US 130,022

101

92

75,108

Italy 136,366

124

90

67,991†

12

6

665

US 126,353

103

94

69,440

21

5

699

US 130,924

68

94

74,400

20

5

730

21

5

717

16

-7 Virginia (Darden)

US 127,767

83

94

70,700

17

– New York (Stern)

US 129,059

102

95

71,676

21

5

716

18 +10 S. California (Marshall)

US 122,634

125

96

63,096

22

5

705

US 135,105

69

97

79,368

21

5

728

99

48,333

21

6

696

19
20

-3 MIT (Sloan)
+2 Washington (Foster)

US 118,355

101

Full ranking and methodology at Economist.com/whichmba *De facto MBA entrance exam, out of a possible 800 †Total course tuition fee

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Business

Tech recruitment

Advanced Micro Devices

Egghead-hunting

The Zen masters

How Silicon Valley woos clever
Stanford students

A chipmaking underdog is having its
day—and nipping at Intel’s heels

C

D

ongratulations, you got into Stanford University. You beat 22 other candidates vying for each coveted place. For
you, competition doesn’t quite stop there:
being best in class boosts your prospects.
But the real ﬁghting now will be over 7,100
undergraduates and 9,400 graduate students, not between them. Technology
giants and sexy startups all want this brainpower. So do venture capital (vc) funds. All
go to sometimes absurd lengths to get it.
Accelerator programmes, such as Startx
or Alchemist Accelerator, court budding
entrepreneurs with burritos, desk space
and thousands of dollars in earliest-stage
funding. They hope to ferret out the next
hp, Cisco, Google, PalPal, Netﬂix or other
tech success story that can trace its roots to
Stanford’s campus in sleepy Palo Alto, Silicon Valley’s spiritual epicentre.
To beat others to top talent, some deeppocketed investors take on teaching appointments. Venture capitalists from
Floodgate teach a course in how to evaluate
startups. Many wannabe founders attend—
and are evaluated in turn. Those who sparkle in ﬁnal exams, which look a lot like
startup pitch days, are invited to meet investors. Many such meetings turn into
funding rounds (see Buttonwood). One
student recounts how a Silicon Valley luminary who sometimes teaches at Stanford’s Graduate School of Business has
funded students on the spot.
Partners from vc ﬁrms like Accel,
Threshold Ventures and Mayﬁeld sponsor
fellowships for entrepreneurial students—
and host regular soirées and annual weekend getaways to Lake Tahoe. With such opportunities about, gushes Patty Sakunkoo,
a phd-student-turned-entrepreneur who
has created multiple photo and video apps,
“you can’t help but catch the startup bug
while at Stanford.”
Some vcs hope at least some students
can resist—and come to work for them instead. They hang out with other company
recruiters—from technology giants and
small startups alike—at one of Palo Alto’s
half-dozen Coupa Cafés, a local coﬀeeshop chain. They treat prospective hires to
lattes—and promises of a rich career.
Now that stock options are falling out of
favour as one tech initial public oﬀering
after another ﬁzzles, for smaller startups
the richness relies more on the emotional
appeal of founders’ mission. Either that, or
they oﬀer dibs on their product: Josh Wolﬀ,

Inﬂating expectations

a computer-science and bioengineering
undergraduate, recalls being repeatedly
approached by someone on LinkedIn who
wanted to contract him as a consultant—
and pay with his own cryptocurrency (Mr
Wolﬀ wisely declined). In the end, though,
“it is so hard to compete with Big Tech,”
sighs one founder.
The giants, many with headquarters
nearby, rule the roost at Stanford. They, too,
play up their mission and the importance
of each job. But mostly, they shower students with goodies. The annual job fair in
October is an “insane arms race of free corporate swag”, says Ashwin Siripurapu, a
computer-science graduate. Students exchange résumés for trinkets (usb sticks,
Rubik’s cubes) or, occasionally, heftier gifts
(bluetooth speakers, tablets). Within days
oﬀers start ﬂooding in, including from
ﬁrms that students never approached.
Once they identify a keeper, cash-rich
ﬁrms—be they listed behemoths or multibillion-dollar unicorns—spare no expense.
They wine and dine students at glitzy Palo
Alto restaurants like Reposado or Il Fornaio
and put them up in ﬁve-star hotels on visits
to oﬃces in places like New York. One Stanford graduate recalls a big unicorn paying
for an Uber Copter to ﬂy him from Manhattan to jfk airport.
When all is said and done, it is hard to
resist a starting salary of $150,000200,000, great health insurance, wellness
reimbursements and unlimited vacation
time (including at company retreats)—and
a signing bonus of $10,000-20,000, for
good measure. A job at today’s conglomerates—Alphabet, Apple, Amazon or Facebook—increasingly resembles one at General Electric in the 1980s: making up in
perks what it lacks in sizzle. 7

57

avid, he of the spat with Goliath, is an
overused corporate analogy. But it is
hard to think of a more appropriate one for
Advanced Micro Devices (amd). On October
29th the American chipmaking tiddler reported its third-quarter results. Lisa Su, its
boss, declared herself “extremely pleased”.
No wonder. At $1.8bn, revenue was the
highest since 2005. amd predicted that
next quarter’s ﬁgures would be equally
perky, up 48% on the previous year to
$2.1bn. Its share price has risen 15-fold
since 2015 (see chart).
amd is more important to the chip business than its diminutive stature suggests.
It provides the only meaningful competition to not one but two Goliaths in two important parts of the semiconductor industry. Its cpus—the general-purpose chips at
the heart of modern laptops, desktops and
data centres—compete with those from Intel, whose $71bn of revenue in 2018 made it
the world’s second-biggest chipmaker. Its
gpus—which provide 3d graphics for video
games and, increasingly, the computational grunt for trendy machine-learning algorithms—go up against those from Nvidia,
whose revenues last year of $11.7bn were
nearly twice those of amd.
amd’s purple patch comes mostly from
its battles with Intel. Until recently, Intel
virtually monopolised the cpu market. Analysts at Mercury Research reckon that in
2015 its chips accounted for 92.4% of desktop and laptop computers, and 99.2% of the
more lucrative market in server chips. Mercury’s most recent numbers put amd’s
share at 14.7% for desktops and laptops. For
servers it is a more modest 3.1%—but still
ﬁve times what it was two years ago.
1
Overclocking
Total returns, January 1st 2016=100
1,200
AMD

1,000
800

Nvidia

600
400

2016

S&P 500 Semiconductors

200

Intel

0

17

Source: Datastream from Reﬁnitiv

18

19

58

2

Business

Two things explain the ﬁrm’s resurgence. One is a better product. In 2012 amd
rehired Jim Keller, a well-regarded chip designer who had been at Apple. amd had
long been competing on price—its chips
were slower than Intel’s but much cheaper.
Mr Keller’s “Zen” chips, unveiled in 2017,
are still cheap. But they are now as zippy as
Intel’s, or even zippier: amd’s top-end server chip, for instance, is faster than its Intel
counterpart in many tasks, and costs half
as much. Zen chips have won a string of
contracts with Microsoft and Sony (for new
games consoles), Google (data centres) and

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Cray (supercomputers), among others.
The second reason is that, while amd
has improved, Intel has stumbled. The ﬁrm
makes its own chips. Its latest and greatest
manufacturing process, which should
have delivered a big performance boost, is
years late, leaving the ﬁrm to rehash existing designs. amd contracts most of its
manufacturing to the Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, which has
now caught up with Intel’s technology.
Can amd’s good fortune last? Intel eventually put paid to similarly competitive
spells at the turn of the century and in the

mid-2000s. It is trying again. In 2018 it
hired Mr Keller, this time from Tesla (he
had left amd in 2015). It plans to launch an
advanced new manufacturing process in
2021. A planned move into gpus could
squeeze amd from another direction.
For now, amd’s resurgence is good news
for consumers, it departments, cloudcomputing ﬁrms and anybody who uses
software. Like any good monopolist, Intel
charges a steep price for its products—unless amd is doing well. Sure enough, Intel’s
newest set of desktop chips, due in November, are some of its thriftiest in years. 7

Bartleby Whistle while you work
Research suggests happy employees are good for ﬁrms and investors

T

here is an old joke about a new
arrival in Hell, who is given the
choice by Satan of two diﬀerent working
environments. In the ﬁrst, frazzled
workers shovel huge piles of coal into a
ﬁery furnace. In the second, a group of
workers stand, waist-deep in sewage,
sipping cups of tea. The condemned man
opts, on balance, for the second room. As
soon as the door closes, the foreman
shouts “Right lads, tea break over. Time
to stand on your heads again.”
Terrible working conditions have a
long tradition. Early industry was
marked by its dirty, dangerous factories
(dark, satanic mills). In the early 20th
century workers were forced into dull,
repetitive tasks by the needs of the production line. However, in a service-based
economy, it makes sense that focusing
on worker morale might be a much more
fruitful approach.
Proving the thesis is more diﬃcult.
But that is the aim of a new study* which
examines the relationship between
happiness and productivity of workers at
British Telecom. Three academics—
Clement Bellet of Erasmus University,
Rotterdam, Jan-Emmanuel de Neve of
the Saïd Business School, Oxford, and
George Ward of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology—surveyed 1,800
sales workers at 11 British call centres. All
each employee had to do was click on a
simple emoji each week to indicate their
level of happiness. Those workers were
charged with selling customers broadband, telephone and television deals. In
total the authors collected adequate
responses from 1,161 people over a sixmonth period.
The results were striking. Workers
made 13% more sales in weeks when they
were happy than when they were unhappy. This was not because they were work-

ing longer hours; in happy weeks, they
made more calls per hour and were more
eﬃcient at converting those calls into
sales. The tricky part, however, is determining the direction of causation. Workers may be happier when they are selling
more because they anticipate a bigger
bonus, or because successful sales pitches
are less stressful to make than unsuccessful ones.
The academics tried an ingenious way
to get round this causation problem by
examining a very British issue—the weather. Workers turned out to be less happy on
days when the weather in their local area
was bad and this unhappiness converted
into lower sales. Since they were making
national calls, not local ones, it is unlikely
that customer unhappiness with the
weather was driving the sales numbers. So
it was worker mood driving sales, not the
other way round.
Even if this reasoning proves to be
correct, businesses may not ﬁnd it of
comfort. Short of siting all their call centres in Hawaii, companies cannot control
the weather conditions their workers face.

The academics point out that “what we
are not able to do, given our data and
setting, is adjudicate as to whether investing in schemes to enhance employee
happiness makes good business sense”.
It is possible that the costs of such
schemes might outweigh any gains in
productivity.
More research is clearly needed. But
there is evidence that happier workers
are good news for shareholders, as well
as productivity. Analysts at boa Merrill
Lynch Global Research studied the stocks
of ﬁrms rated on Glassdoor, a website
that allows employees to rate the companies they work for. Those with the highest ratings outperformed those with the
lowest by nearly ﬁve percentage points a
year between 2013 and 2019. The analysts
also used software that picked over the
text of employee reviews and found that
incorporating this approach improved
the risk-reward trade-oﬀ (as measured by
the Sharpe ratio) of the strategy.
The analysts have now applied the
same approach to picking stocks based
on particular industries. Again, the
sectors where workers gave the best
reviews on Glassdoor between 2013 and
2019 easily outperformed those where
employees gave a thumbs down.
None of this is unequivocal proof. The
history of equity investing is littered
with strategies that worked well when
back-tested only to disintegrate when
applied in the real world. But at the very
least, it suggests that ﬁrms should consider the merits of a contented workforce. And that might mean giving them
harps and ambrosia, rather than Hell.

.............................................................
* “Does Employee Happiness Have an Impact on
Productivity?”, Saïd Business School Working
Paper 2019-13
Economist.com/blogs/bartleby

60

Business

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Schumpeter The spirit of Carlos

What a great European car boss can teach a troubled industry

I

n 2013 two Carloses sat atop the Renault-Nissan alliance. One
was Carlos Ghosn, the Brazilian-born architect of the FrancoJapanese carmaking colossus. His protégé was Carlos Tavares, the
Portuguese chief operating oﬃcer of Renault, who made sure that
good cars rolled oﬀ the production line. But Mr Tavares, an engineer and racing driver, was not content trailing the fast-living Mr
Ghosn. As he revealed in an interview that year, his ambition was
to lead a big car company, such as General Motors. Mr Ghosn was
horriﬁed. Shortly afterwards, Mr Tavares quit Renault. A few
months later he was boss of psa Group, maker of Peugeot and Citroën, Renault’s domestic rival. It was the start of a series of
manoeuvres that have now made him the talk of the car industry,
much like Mr Ghosn before and after his arrest in Japan last year on
charges of ﬁnancial misconduct (which Mr Ghosn denies).
On October 30th the boards of psa and Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (fca), an Italian-American company, said the two ﬁrms
planned to merge. Mr Tavares would become chief executive of the
combined group and John Elkann, fca’s chairman (who sits on the
board of The Economist’s parent company), would chair its board. It
would create the world’s fourth-biggest carmaker by vehicle sales,
with a market value of around $50bn. On-oﬀ discussions between
the two ﬁrms were ruptured in early summer when fca attempted
to merge with Renault, a deal that was thwarted by Renault’s biggest shareholder, the French government. The merged group
would probably ﬁnd most of the €3.7bn ($4.1bn) of annual costsavings they hope to achieve in Europe, a stagnant market where
stringent environmental regulations are about to make carmakers’
lives tougher still. Competition issues in parts of Europe, feisty
unions and messy politics could yet scupper any deal. Furthermore, it is not clear whether Peugeot is Fiat’s preferred partner.
But the planned mega-merger puts the spotlight squarely on Mr
Tavares. As Max Warburton of Bernstein, a broker, puts it: “Those
of us who subscribe to the Great Man Theory will be fascinated to
see what Tavares could achieve at fca, were he given the chance.”
The “Great Man Theory” Mr Warburton is referring to states that
big car-industry mergers are a murderous task that only a true
leader can hope to pull oﬀ. Fiat’s revered late boss, Sergio Marchionne, managed this feat with Chrysler. Mr Ghosn succeeded in-

holding the Renault-Nissan alliance together for many years.
A corollary to the Great Man Theory is what could be called the
“Big Firm Hypothesis”. Typically attributed to Marchionne, it posits that huge challenges facing the industry, such as electric vehicles and self-driving cars, necessitate global consolidation. To an
extent Mr Tavares embodies both doctrines, having swiftly turned
around ﬁrst Peugeot, after it was battered by the ﬁnancial crisis of
2008-09, then Opel and Vauxhall, which he bought from gm in
2017. But what truly sets him apart is his ability to turn carmakers
into, as he has put it, “psychopaths of performance”. That tireless
devotion to proﬁts, even if it comes at the expense of personal
greatness or corporate bigness, is a lesson most of the industry
could learn.
The fraught Renault-Nissan tie-up is a case in point. In the
wake of Mr Ghosn’s fall from grace last November it has been an example of how not to run a car empire. Well before his arrest, the arrangement had serious ﬂaws. Rather than being a global network
built around strong brands and factory-wide economies of scale, it
was more of a global car park. It ﬁlled diﬀerent parts of the world
with as many of each ﬁrm’s cars as possible (and those of Mitsubishi, the alliance’s other Japanese partner), whatever their price
and quality. It was riven with jealousies. Nissan had long chafed at
a shareholding structure that gave it less sway than Renault.
Worse, the Japanese ﬁrm resented the control that the French government, which owns barely 15% of Renault, exercised over the
partnership. It also feared French ambitions to take it over.
Since Mr Ghosn’s arrest things have gone from bad to worse. Renault’s abortive merger with fca showed what an irksome meddler the French state has become. It has obstinately refused to
make any concessions to the wary Japanese, for instance by selling
down Renault’s stake in Nissan to rebalance the shareholding or by
reducing its own stake in Renault. In the meantime the feud has
distracted all three alliance members from the business of selling
cars. Nissan’s sales have shrunk. Proﬁts are plunging. Renault’s
volumes are dropping, too. Its balance-sheet is coming under
strain, especially since it will get less cash from its 43% stake in
Nissan, which recently slashed its dividend.
In the eyes of the French government, the best answer is to double down on the alliance. Renault’s chairman, Jean-Dominique Senard, has vowed to do just that, hoping that a recent change of
leadership at the top of both Renault and Nissan will help. Investors would prefer a clearer break with the past. Some want Renault
to sell some of its Nissan shares and use the money to strengthen
its balance-sheet, as a prelude to a more equitable alliance. Others
want a full merger of the two. The boldest had hoped for a grand
bargain, in which a stronger Renault once again courts fca, with
Nissan in tow.
Back to nuts and bolts
The talks between Peugeot and fca have, for the time being at least,
sent the grand-bargain idea careening oﬀ the road. It has left Renault and Nissan looking stranded. That makes it imperative for
them to do what Mr Tavares has done with Peugeot, Opel and Vauxhall: put proﬁtability front and centre. As Mr Tavares has said,
“there’s going to be chaos between now and 2030. Not all manufacturers will survive the Darwinism, not all will master the electricvehicle track.” Some regard consolidation as the best way to navigate the disruption. Others see the need for a great leader, who can
build and maintain alliances. One thing is certain—none will succeed without a Tavaresque focus on the bottom line. 7

Brieﬁng Saudi Aramco

The Goliath

DHAHRAN, SAUDI ARABIA

On the eve of its public listing, Aramco is an unrivalled giant in an industry
vexed by challenges

I

n the headquarters of the world’s
most proﬁtable company, past its heavily
guarded perimeter, down a road, through
another security gate, out of the blazing
sun and into a cool oﬃce building sit box
after box of rocks. They are samples of anhydrite, shale, dolomite and grainstone, retrieved from kilometres below ground. A
block of grainstone looks perfectly ordinary, its dark surface dotted with pores. But
nestled in this rock were the remains of the
tiny marine animals and plants which
blanketed the Arabian peninsula before
there was such a thing, over 100m years
ago, and which still give the rock a faint, familiar scent: oil. “Smells like money,” says
one executive—$111bn, to be precise.
That was the net income earned last
year by Saudi Aramco, the kingdom’s stateowned oil company. It is nearly twice that
of Apple, the world’s most proﬁtable listed
ﬁrm, and more than the combined earnings of the ﬁve biggest international oil
companies—ExxonMobil, Royal Dutch

Shell, bp, Chevron and Total. For decades,
the riches from Saudi Arabia’s vast reserves
have been the exclusive property of Saudi
Arabia. Muhammad bin Salman, the kingdom’s crown prince, wants that to change.
In 2016 Prince Muhammad told this
newspaper he was keen to list a portion of
Aramco’s shares, in an eﬀort to raise money
to diversify the kingdom’s economy. After
much delay, those plans seem to be proceeding. In September the government appointed Yasir al-Rumayyan, the head of the
kingdom’s sovereign-wealth fund, to be
the new chairman of Aramco and charged
him with taking the listing forward. Eleven
banks and ﬁnancial advisers have been
working feverishly to that end. If all goes
according to schedule, in early November
the kingdom will announce its intention to
list 2-3% of Aramco’s shares on the Tadawul, the Saudi stock exchange. It would
probably be the biggest initial public oﬀering (ipo) in history, raising $30bn or more
and eclipsing Alibaba’s $25bn listing in

The Economist November 2nd 2019

61

2014. A second listing may follow on a foreign exchange sometime in 2020.
Yet almost four years after Prince Muhammad announced the desire for an ipo,
there remains a chance it is postponed.
Disagreement over the company’s value
has already delayed the listing—Aramco
was expected to announce its intention to
ﬂoat in late October. It is unclear what price
will satisfy the crown prince, who said in
2016 he hoped for a valuation of $2trn. Independent analysts think he would be
lucky to get $1.5trn.
The uncertainty points to a contradiction at the heart of Aramco, at once the oil
industry’s undisputed titan and a company
plagued by problems. In September drones
struck two Aramco facilities in eastern Saudi Arabia, knocking out more than half of
its production. Further attacks are possible—America says Iran was responsible. In
October Fitch downgraded Aramco’s credit
rating, owing to risks posed by geopolitics
and its economically shaky sovereign. Saudi Arabia’s ability to use its heft to support
global oil prices is in doubt. The oil price
has sunk to about $60 a barrel, from $75 in
April, amid fears of a recession.
What is more, investors have soured on
the oil industry. Energy’s weighting in the
s&p 500 index dipped below 5% in June,
less than a third of its level in 2008. Oil
markets are notoriously volatile; they may
become more so as eﬀorts to mitigate cli- 1

62

Brieﬁng Saudi Aramco

2 mate change hit oil consumption. “If this

ipo was 15 years ago, it would be a compelling investment opportunity,” says Oswald
Clint of Bernstein, a ﬁnancial ﬁrm. “But the
outlook for oil demand and the energy sector is opaque.”
Aramco maintains that, regardless of
the oil market’s broader troubles, it will
outcompete its rivals. Recently the company has used deals and new business units to secure customers, diversify its revenue and maximise the value of its oil. Its
boosters like to say that the world’s last barrel of oil will come from Saudi Arabia. But it
is unclear what value investors will ascribe
to such a distant possibility. As international energy giants and petrostates jostle
to ﬁnd their footing in an uncertain era, no
company will loom larger than Aramco.
The company’s history is in some ways
similar to that of other national oil giants.
Americans drilled their ﬁrst successful
well in Saudi Arabia in 1938; the Arabian
American Oil Company once had its headquarters in New York. The nationalisation
of Aramco from 1973 to 1981 was part of a
wave of requisitions that swept oilﬁelds
from Venezuela to Malaysia.
However Aramco is no ordinary national oil company. It is widely regarded by
those within the industry as being well
run, with professional managers and a distinct culture. The Aramco compound in
Dhahran, in Saudi Arabia’s Eastern Province, is a world unto itself, home to 15,000
people. It has schools, gyms, food shops
and streets lined with quaint houses—the
campus resembles an Arizona suburb, with
more mosques. About 90% of Aramco’s
employees are Saudi, but women are as
likely to wear trousers as an abaya.
Nor is Saudi Arabia an ordinary petrostate. Much of its treasure resides in the
Eastern Province, including oilﬁelds such
as the celebrated 48.3m-barrel Ghawar,
shaped like a dancer’s leg en pointe. Oil is
also tucked beneath the rolling dunes of
the Empty Quarter and the seabed of the
Gulf. In all Aramco has nearly 500 reservoirs, with 260m barrels of proved reserves. That is more than triple the combined proved reserves of the ﬁve
supermajors. Last year Aramco pumped
one in eight of the world’s barrels of crude.
Such astonishing scale has ensured that
Saudi Arabia remains the de facto leader of
the Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (opec). American frackers
may collectively produce more oil, but they
operate independently. Saudi Arabia alone
can ramp production up and down quickly
in the attempt to tame volatile oil markets.
Oil has brought the kingdom prosperity.
Saudi Arabia sustains its absolute monarchy by oﬀering citizens a safety-net, including free education and health care, as
well as a guaranteed-income programme.
The kingdom’s natural resources beneﬁt

The Economist November 2nd 2019

1

Even bigger oil
2018
Energy
companies

Daily oil and gas
production, mboe*

Saudi Aramco

13.6

224

63

Gazprom

10.5

41

31

Rosneft

5.7

31

23

ExxonMobil

3.8

50

18

BP

3.7

35

12

Royal Dutch Shell

3.6

61

16

Chevron

2.9

41

26

Total

2.7

34

18

Eni SpA

1.8

EBITDA
$bn

Source: Bank of America Merrill Lynch

some Saudis more than others. In posh
parts of Riyadh and Dammam, lush greenery peeks above the concrete walls separating residential compounds from the dusty
streets beyond. As a whole, however, Saudi
Arabia is dangerously dependent on crude.
Oil accounts for nearly 70% of the government’s revenue and almost 80% of exports. Non-oil activity is often the result of
government spending, which is itself dependent on oil. It is hard to ﬁnd a person or
service in the kingdom that does not somehow rely on oil or gas. The arid climate requires the use of energy-intensive desalination plants—in Saudi Arabia, even water
depends on fossil fuel.
Swing consumer
The country has long been vulnerable to
shifts in the oil price. However the kingdom faces three new, big problems. First,
shale has transformed America into the
world’s largest oil producer, vexing opec’s
eﬀorts to maintain high, stable prices. Second, Saudi Arabia has a burgeoning, youthful population. The oil industry, which requires capital but not much labour, cannot
employ enough of them. The imf reckons

Petropolis

22

EBITDA
% margin

25
*Million barrels of oil equivalent

that up to 1m jobs could be needed in Saudi
Arabia in the next ﬁve years.
The third risk is the largest and most
uncertain: global oil demand may subside.
Economic growth and demand, which have
risen in sync, could be decoupled as the
threat of climate change grows. However
no one knows whether this might happen,
or when. America’s Energy Information
Administration, within President Donald
Trump’s energy department, expects the
world to remain thirsty for oil, with demand rising up until 2050. ExxonMobil
also takes a bullish view. Mohammed alQahtani, Aramco’s head of upstream, expects that “demand will be robust for the
next two decades plus”—the company
models its reservoirs to 2200. Some oil
companies tactfully present a variety of
scenarios, as does the International Energy
Agency (iea), a forecaster. Any tidy prediction belies a tangle of assumptions and debate, according to an independent expert
who has reviewed the iea’s drafts.
Little wonder, then, that Prince Muhammad wants to diversify. His Vision
2030 aspires to transform the economy
through strategic investment—for instance in manufacturing and “special economic zones”, such as a planned robotic
city called neom near the Red Sea. Raising
cash for that depends on the Aramco ipo.
There have been many reasons to delay,
including concern over legal exposure that
might come from listing in New York, the
desire to acquire Sabic, the kingdom’s giant
petrochemical company, as well as the valuation question. This time last year, plans
for an oﬀering seemed postponed indeﬁnitely amid uproar over the murder of Jamal Khashoggi, a dissident journalist, at
the Saudi consulate in Istanbul.
Since then, however, Aramco has announced a $69bn deal to buy Sabic. To raise
money for the transaction, in April Aramco
issued $12bn in bonds, which investors
lapped up. The publication of a 469-page
bond prospectus eased anxiety about letting the world pore over Aramco’s books.
Meanwhile, the rationale for pursuing a 1

The Economist November 2nd 2019
2 listing—to raise money to diversify the

economy—remains as urgent as ever.
Preparations for an ipo accelerated after
the bond oﬀering. Aramco held its ﬁrst
earnings call with investors in August (analysts, perhaps eager to establish good will,
have rarely been so polite). To co-ordinate
the listing the government has hired six
global banks, JPMorgan, Goldman Sachs,
Credit Suisse, Citi, hsbc, and Bank of
America Merrill Lynch, as well as Saudi
Arabia’s Samba and National Commercial
Bank. Michael Klein, Moelis and Lazard are
serving as advisers, say insiders. Investors,
at last, are on the threshold of owning a
sliver of Aramco’s shares.
The trouble with letting the market
loose on Aramco, however, is that it tends
to make up its own mind about valuations.
This seems to make the crown prince uneasy. Bloomberg has reported that the government is exploring ways to limit volatility in trading after the Tadawul listing. The
government expects local business leaders
to buy shares enthusiastically to support
Aramco’s valuation. “It is seen as part of being loyal,” says one seasoned businessman
in Riyadh. “It’s not an explicit quid pro quo,”
says another. “However you cannot do
business in Saudi without being seen favourably by the power corridors.” Saudi
banks have asked local investors if they
would increase their stakes if oﬀered new
lines of credit.
If an ipo does proceed, however,
Aramco’s valuation will eventually reﬂect
the business itself: a company of staggering scale, aggressive strategy and unique
complications. In recent years Aramco has
moved to strengthen its traditional business and expand to new areas—Mr Qahtani
describes this as “opportunistic”, not defensive. Changes include establishing a
trading operation and investing more in
natural-gas projects.
Its most important strategic shift is to
move downstream, into petrochemicals.
Its purchase of a 70% stake in Sabic, announced in March, serves the twin goals of
raising cash for Saudi Arabia’s sovereignwealth fund and diversifying Aramco’s revenue. The iea expects petrochemicals to
account for almost half of the growth in oil
demand up to 2050. Sabic is already the
world’s fourth-largest chemical company,
generating $14bn of gross operating proﬁt
last year. Its businesses span fertilisers in
India to plastics used in Range Rovers.
Aramco has also used its deep pockets
to bolster its standing in Asia. In August
Reliance, an Indian conglomerate, said
that Aramco had taken a 20% stake in its reﬁning unit, for roughly $15bn. Aramco has
announced other investments in Asia, including projects in South Korea, Malaysia
and China. Joint ventures in reﬁneries and
petrochemical plants help Aramco hedge
against low oil prices. They also include

Brieﬁng Saudi Aramco

agreements to be the projects’ long-term
supplier of crude. Deal by deal, Aramco is
securing customers for its oil in Asia,
where demand is most likely to rise. Asia
buys 71% of the company’s crude exports.
Some national oil companies are trying
to pursue a similar strategy. adnoc, of the
United Arab Emirates, is joining up with
Aramco on a big reﬁning complex in India.
What makes Aramco most distinct, however, is how cheaply it can pump oil. Its
centralised resources, slick infrastructure
and decades spent honing its drilling mean
that extracting oil costs just $2.80 a barrel,
one-third the average level of international
oil companies. That helps Aramco achieve
margins more than twice that of Rosneft, a
Russian giant, and nearly four times that of
Shell (see chart 1 on previous page).
Cheaper and cleaner
The Economist worked with Rystad Energy,
a research ﬁrm, to examine how the value
of Saudi Arabia’s reserves might stack up if
demand wanes—because of, say, the
strengthening of American climate regulations after an election. The oil price at
which a company could make a 10% return,
the breakeven price, is one way of showing
which countries’ reserves are most vulnerable. Another way is to look at how much
energy is used to extract oil, thereby increasing emissions, which would add a further layer of costs if carbon were to be
taxed. On both measures, Saudi Arabia
stands out.
Aramco’s breakeven costs for new projects, even after tax, are $31, according to
Rystad Energy’s data, slightly higher than
Iran, Iraq or Kuwait but less than half the
level of Russia and two-thirds the level in
America. Its carbon-dioxide emissions
from extraction and ﬂaring are less than
half the global average. A separate analysis,
published last year by researchers at Stanford University and Aramco, found similar
results (see chart 2). Indeed, Aramco exposes its peers’ weakness. Canada and Venezuela are particularly vulnerable, owing to
2

Carbon fingerprints
Emissions from oil production

Breakeven
oil price*,
$ per barrel

CO2 equivalent/g per megajoule
2015
0

5

10

15

20

Venezuela

57.90

Canada

71.45

Iran

29.00

Iraq

27.36

Nigeria

51.88

United States

48.29

Russia

65.00

Saudi Arabia

31.00

Sources: Stanford University; Rystad *For new projects after tax

production that is both dear and dirty.
Compared with those of many rivals,
Aramco’s reserves therefore seem well situated, no matter what happens to demand.
Yet even with its relative bounty it faces
several big risks. The trove of oil assets under Saudi soil remain vulnerable to attack.
Aramco executives, who usually refer to
the September strikes as “the incident”,
point out that repairs were done quickly.
However it was no one-oﬀ. The attacks in
September followed strikes on a large pipeline, airports and an oilﬁeld. Further incidents could complicate Aramco’s eﬀorts to
secure more long-term customers.
The kingdom’s claim on Aramco also
makes investors nervous. Saudi Arabia has
tried to ease their concern. Reforms announced in 2017 included reducing
Aramco’s tax rate from 85% to 50%. In September Aramco unveiled a new dividend
policy, which envisions a total payout of
$75bn in 2020 and beyond. Non-state
shareholders will receive a proportionate
share of this, and their absolute payout will
be protected, even if the total value of
Aramco’s dividend drops. Further, it said
that dividend would probably rise.
However Aramco’s dividend yield, at a
valuation of $1.5trn, remains lower than
those of the European supermajors. Some
investors remain squeamish about what
might happen if oil prices were depressed
for a long period. Aramco could still be
proﬁtable, but its proﬁts might not be high
enough to sustain the kingdom’s budget.
Prince Muhammad’s Vision 2030 might
not go as planned—one of the Saudi sovereign-wealth fund’s big early investments
was in SoftBank’s Vision Fund, which made
a disastrous bet on WeWork. “If oil prices
are lower, you could expect that the state
would potentially increase taxes,” says
Dmitry Marinchenko of Fitch. The promise
to maintain high dividends to non-state
shareholders, he points out, would not be
legally sacrosanct.
There remains the question of what a
listed Aramco would mean for opec, and
therefore for oil markets. Historically Saudi Arabia has curbed its own output, often
beyond the levels required by opec, in the
eﬀort to support oil prices. Khalid al-Falih
long served as both oil minister and
Aramco’s chairman. In September the government sacked him from both posts, ensuring that one person now oversees
Aramco and another the oil ministry. Yet
the rational goals of a listed Aramco—
boosting production to lower prices and
squeeze rivals, for instance—may diverge
wildly from the historic goals of opec.
Such uncertainties will weigh on
Aramco, before and after any listing. Rivals
are watching with interest. Saudi Arabia’s
transition to oil’s new era is tortured. For
the many countries with higher costs and
less cash, it may be even more so. 7

63

64

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Finance & economics

Chinese demography

Old, not yet rich
SHANGHAI

Forget bad debts, the trade war, cronyism and autocracy. Demography may be the
Chinese economy’s biggest challenge

S

hortly after 9am the neighbourhood
care centre for the elderly shuﬄes to
life. One man belts out a folk song. A centenarian sits by his Chinese chessboard,
awaiting an opponent. A virtual-reality
machine, which lets users experience such
exotic adventures as grocery shopping and
taking the subway, sits unused in the corner. A bigger attraction is the morning exercise routine—a couple of dozen people
limbering up their creaky joints. They are
the leading edge of China’s rapid ageing, a
trend that is already starting to constrain
its economic potential.
Since the care centre opened half a year
ago in Changning, in central Shanghai,
more than 12,000 elderly people from the
area have passed through its doors. The city
launched these centres in 2014, combining
health clinics, drop-in facilities and oldpeople’s homes. It plans to have 400 by
2022. “We can’t wait. We’ve got to do everything in our ability to build these now,”
says Peng Yanli, a community organiser.
The pressure on China is mounting. The

coming year will see an inauspicious milestone. The median age of Chinese citizens
will overtake that of Americans in 2020, according to un projections (see chart). Yet
China is still far poorer, its median income
barely a quarter of America’s. A much-discussed fear—that China will get old before
it gets rich—is no longer a theoretical possibility but fast becoming reality.
According to un projections, during the
next 25 years the percentage of China’s population over the age of 65 will more than
double, from 12% to 25%. By contrast AmerAlso in this section
65 Remodelling HSBC
66 Another trade ﬁght
66 Turkey’s tottering economy
67 Buttonwood: VC after SoftBank
68 Fixing the repo market
69 Free exchange: Which capitalism?

ica is on track to take nearly a century, and
Europe to take more than 60 years, to make
the same shift. China’s pace is similar to Japan’s and a touch slower than South Korea’s, but both those countries began ageing rapidly when they were roughly three
times as wealthy per person.
Seen in one light, the greying of China is
successful development. A Chinese person
born in 1960 could expect to live 44 years, a
shorter span than a Ghanaian born the
same year. Life expectancy for Chinese babies born today is 76 years, just short of that
in America. But it is also a consequence of
China’s notorious population-control
strategy. In 1973, when the government
started limiting births, Chinese women averaged 4.6 children each. Today they have
only 1.6, and some scholars say even that
estimate is too high.
Fertility was bound to decline as China
got wealthier, but the one-child policy
made the fall steeper. Even though the
country shifted to a two-child policy in
2016 and may soon scrap limits altogether,
the relaxation came too late. The workingage population, which began to shrink in
2012, will decline for decades to come. By
the middle of the century it will be nearly a
ﬁfth smaller than it is now. China will have
gone from nine working-age adults per retired person in 2000 to just two by 2050.
The economic impact is being felt in
two main ways. The most obvious is the
need to look after all the old people. Pen- 1

The Economist November 2nd 2019
2 sion payouts to retired people overtook

contributions by workers in 2014. According to the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, the national pension fund could run
out of money by 2035. The ﬁnance ministry
is taking small steps to shore the system
up: in September it transferred 10% of its
stakes in four giant state-owned ﬁnancial
ﬁrms to the fund. But far more is needed.
Government spending on pensions and
health care is about a tenth of gdp, just over
half the level usual in older, wealthier
countries, which themselves will have to
spend more as they get even older.
The second impact is on growth. Some
Chinese economists—notably Justin Lin of
Peking University—maintain that ageing
need not slow the country down, in part
thanks to technological advances. But another camp, led by Cai Fang of the Chinese
Academy of Social Sciences, has been winning the argument so far. A shrinking labour pool is pushing up wages and, as ﬁrms
spend more on technology to replace workers, pushing down returns on capital investment. The upshot, Mr Cai calculates, is
that China’s potential growth rate has fallen to about 6.2%—almost exactly where it
is today. The labour shortage is hitting not
just companies but entire cities. From
Xi’an in the north to Shenzhen in the south,
municipalities have made it easier for university graduates to move in, hoping thereby to attract skilled young workers.
China could, in theory, mitigate the
downside from its ageing by boosting both
labour-force participation and productivity—that is, getting more people into work
and more out of them. Neither is easy. Retirement ages are very low in China (in
many jobs, 60 for men and 50 for women),
but the government has resisted raising
them for fear of a backlash. And a return to
state-led growth under Xi Jinping appears
to be hurting productivity. As George Magnus, an economist, writes in “Red Flags:
Why Xi’s China is in Jeopardy”, demography is not destiny, and China has time to
change course. “The bad news, though, is
that the time that is available is passing by
rapidly,” he says.
One piece of good news is that China is
thinking creatively about how to look after
the swelling ranks of pensioners. Traditionally, children have been expected to
care for their elderly parents, which helps
explain why public investment in old-age
homes has been minimal. But most families now have just one child, and that child
is working. Suzhou, a wealthy city near
Shanghai, shows how China can take advantage of its scale. In 2007 Lu Zhong, an
entrepreneur, founded Jujiale as a “virtual
retirement home”, dispatching helpers to
private homes on demand. It now has 1,800
employees serving 130,000 retired people.
Mr Lu says that it needs to grow by about
15% a year to keep up with demand.

Finance & economics

The Middle-Aged Kingdom
Median age of total population, years
FORECAST

60
50

Japan

40
US

Europe

30

China

20
India
10
0

1970 80

90 2000 10

20

30

40

50

Source: UN World Population Prospects

Yet that is a silver lining in a grey-haired
cloud. On October 1st China celebrated the
70th anniversary of the People’s Republic.
By the centenary in 2049, Mr Xi has vowed,
China will have developed to the point that
its strength is plain for the world to see. But
as Ren Zeping, a prominent economist,
tartly noted in a recent report, the median
age in China in 2050 will be nearly 50, compared with 42 in America and just 38 in India. That, he wrote, raised a question: “Can
we rely on this kind of demographic structure to achieve national rejuvenation?” 7
HSBC’s latest plan

Failure to thrive

A banking giant in Asia and Britain is
still struggling to ﬁre on all cylinders

W

hen noel quinn took over as interim chief executive of hsbc from John
Flint, ousted by the board in August, analysts expected a change in style. Whereas
Mr Flint was seen as a cerebral introvert, Mr
Quinn is forthcoming, verging on blunt.
On that front, at least, hsbc’s ﬁrst quarterly-results announcement on his watch
did not disappoint. Although its Asian
business “held up well in a challenging environment”, performance in other areas
was “not acceptable”, Mr Quinn said on October 28th. Third-quarter net proﬁts, down
by 24% on the same period last year, to
$3bn, undershot pundits’ forecasts by 14%.
Revenues fell by 3.2%, to $13.4bn, missing
expectations by 3%. Return on tangible
equity (rote), its chief measure of proﬁtability, reached 6.4%, compared with analysts’ forecast of 9.5%. Investors agreed
with Mr Quinn: the bank’s shares dropped
by 4.3% on the news in London. They have
fallen by about 11% in the past six months.
hsbc’s woes can be blamed in part on
broader conditions: low interest rates, a

65

slowing global economy, business uncertainty in Brexit-hit Britain and trade tensions (hsbc is the world’s largest provider
of trade ﬁnance). Yet that is hardly likely to
reassure investors. Tom Rayner of Numis
Securities, a broker, points out that although some of these trends may be reversed, others, such as Brexit and the trade
wars, may linger. Interest rates may well
fall further. Investors are not yet pricing in
any impact from protests in Hong Kong,
where hsbc is the largest lender. That is too
optimistic, says Fahed Kunwar, at Redburn, another broker.
Mr Quinn does not deny the scale of the
challenge. hsbc is ditching its rote target
of 11% for 2020, and there are hints of a radical overhaul. Mr Quinn spoke of accelerating plans to “remodel” poorly performing
businesses. In August the bank announced
a plan to complete 4,700 redundancies by
the end of this year. Reports suggest hsbc
could seek to cut an additional 8,00010,000 jobs from its headcount of 238,000
(a spokesperson declined to conﬁrm the
number of jobs to go).
Yet after years of cost-cutting, analysts
are divided as to whether much more fat
can be trimmed. Daniel Tabbush of Tabbush Report, an Asia-based research ﬁrm,
says hsbc “is not particularly bloated”. The
bank may also partially exit some sharetrading activities in Western markets, and
wants to sell its French retail operations.
But a hasty disposal of badly performing
units, which also include its American
wholesale arm, may force it to write down
part of their value.
So hopes must be placed in the second
prong of hsbc’s grand reform—to move
capital away from the dreariest businesses
and towards “higher growth and return opportunities”. hsbc’s cost-to-income ratio is
104% in Europe, compared with 43% in
Asia, where it generates nearly 90% of its
proﬁts. It makes only a quarter of its lending in Britain, yet the country generates
35% of its non-performing loans, says Mr
Tabbush. Its $98bn of risk-weighted assets 1
Truth hurts
Return on tangible equity
Q3 2019 or latest available, %
-10

-5

0

JPMorgan Chase
DBS Bank
ICBC
Citigroup
Crédit Agricole
BNP Paribas
Standard Chartered
HSBC
Deutsche Bank
Sources: Bloomberg; company reports

5

10

15

20

66

Finance & economics

The Economist November 2nd 2019
Turkey’s tottering economy

2 allocated to America produce only $527m

in annual proﬁt.
The bank’s management has so far declined to provide any guidance as to where
newly released capital might be sent. hsbc
is already the largest corporate lender in
Asia by market penetration, according to
Greenwich Associates, a research ﬁrm. And
getting more deeply into China may prove
tricky. In August hsbc was omitted from a
list of banks helping Beijing set a new interest-rate benchmark. That suggests the
Chinese regulator may be shunning the
bank over its role in assisting an American
investigation into a key executive at Huawei, a Chinese telecoms ﬁrm. Other dynamic markets, like Vietnam and Indonesia, are tiny by comparison.
There are also limits to how much hsbc
can rejig its various lines of business. Its
strength in trade ﬁnance has so far failed to
translate into clout in investment banking.
Global capital markets are more lucrative,
but volatile. In 2018 hsbc launched a new
motto, “Together We Thrive”. Its diﬃculties may have more to do with this grand
ambition than with external forces. By trying to do too much for too many people in
too many places, it has seen its returns diluted. Yet even for its candid interim boss,
that conclusion may be rather too blunt. 7
Another trade ﬁght

Spilling over
WA S H I N GTO N , D C

Despite talk of a trade ceaseﬁre,
America and China spar at the wto

A

s trade talks continue between
America and China, old ﬁghts are rumbling on. On October 28th China asked the
World Trade Organisation (wto) to allow it
to retaliate against $2.4bn of imports from
America, as part of a long-running dispute
over American treatment of Chinese exports. The ﬁnal sum will be set by an arbitrator, and will be small in the broader context of the two countries’ escalating trade
war. But the symbolism will make it sting.
The dispute concerns two of America’s
biggest gripes: China’s economic model
and the wto’s inability to constrain it.
America accuses China’s government of
bloating its private sector with subsidies,
which spill over to aﬀect businesses
abroad. If state-owned banks make cutprice loans, or state-owned electricity
companies sell cheap energy, Chinese exporters have an unfair advantage, it says. By
last year America had imposed tariﬀs on almost 7% of Chinese imports, citing such
subsidies and the need to defend itself.
Americans argue that if Chinese state

By a thousand cuts
I STA N B U L

Inﬂation has come down, but the
economy remains vulnerable

T

Going nowhere

institutions hold a majority stake in a company, this strongly suggests it is a “public
body” and therefore capable of giving subsidies. But the wto’s appellate body has
generally disagreed. It has also often
backed China’s stance that America’s defensive duties are too harsh.
The United States Trade Representative,
America’s main trade negotiator, attacked
the most recent such judgment, in July.
Such decisions, it said, illustrated its concerns with the way that the wto resolves
disputes. In an attempt to force a change of
approach, it is blocking appointments to
the wto’s appellate body. But bringing the
body to a standstill would do nothing to
solve the rows that have brought America
and China before it again and again. That
would require them to agree on what
counts as a public body, and when defensive tariﬀs are allowable. Even better would
be a deal to limit subsidies, which might be
added to the wto’s rules.
Unfortunately American and Chinese
negotiators, who are currently trying to
strike a “phase one” deal that could bring a
ceaseﬁre in the broader trade war, are not
even discussing these thorny issues. Meanwhile American sanctions against Huawei,
a Chinese telecoms ﬁrm, have ampliﬁed
those voices within China that are calling
for even more subsidies.
In the long run subsidies are hard to
tackle bilaterally, since any beneﬁts can be
undone if an unconstrained third country
boosts its handouts in response. American
oﬃcials have been discussing what new
multilateral rules could look like with
European and Japanese oﬃcials, but without much visible progress. And even if the
trio agreed on something, China might not
play along. On October 26th a forum that
was supposed to address steel subsidies
collapsed, in part because the Chinese
withdrew. Tariﬀs it is, then. 7

urkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, once called high interest rates
“the mother of all evil”. Murat Uysal, its
new central-bank governor, must then be
close to angelic. Since Mr Erdogan sacked
Mr Uysal’s predecessor four months ago for
refusing to slash interest rates, he has cut
three times, by a cumulative ten percentage points (see chart). The latest cut, of 2.5
percentage points on October 24th, was
more than double market expectations.
After last year’s aggressive tightening,
easing now makes some sense. Inﬂation is
back in single digits, after passing 25% last
autumn. The lira has partially recovered
from a battering that had pushed domestic
prices up. In early October America threatened sanctions in response to Turkey’s offensive in Syria. The lira slumped, but after
America brokered a ceaseﬁre deal on October 17th, it steadied again. It strengthened
further when Turkey’s and Russia’s presidents signed a similar agreement. That
gave the bank room for the most recent cut.
Turkey crawled out of recession at the
start of the year, but credit growth is still
weak. Companies with hard-currency debt
have been unable to borrow, and banks sitting on $20bn-worth of non-performing
loans (npls) have been reluctant to lend.
Monetary policy alone will not ﬁx the
economy, says Selva Demiralp of Koc University: “Turkey needs to ﬁnd a solution to
the npl problem ﬁrst.” In September the
government ordered banks to reclassify
debt of 46bn lira ($8bn) as bad loans. But
doubts remain as to how banks will clear
these loans from their balance-sheets.
The economy remains vulnerable to
outside shocks. On October 29th America’s 1
Sorry decline
Turkey
25
20
15
Consumer prices,
% increase on
a year earlier
Policy interest rate, %

10
5
0

2018

2019

Sources: Haver Analytics; Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey

The Economist November 2nd 2019
2 House of Representatives voted to restrict

arms sales to Turkey, sanction the country
over its purchase of a missile-defence system from Russia, and investigate Mr Erdogan’s wealth. Lawmakers also passed a motion recognising the Ottoman slaughter of
Armenians in 1915 as genocide. Though the
sanctions package is unlikely to become
law, relations with America are at their
worst in decades.
Another source of anxiety is an investigation in New York into whether Halkbank,
a Turkish state lender, circumvented
American sanctions against Iran. In an in-

Finance & economics

dictment unsealed on October 15th, prosecutors allege that senior Turkish oﬃcials
took millions of dollars in bribes to keep
the scheme running. A former Halkbank
executive who was convicted for playing a
role in the operation returned to Turkey
this summer after two years in prison. On
October 21st he was appointed head of the
Istanbul stock exchange.
Turkey expects growth of 0.5% this year,
and 5% in 2020. If interest rates are cut further in pursuit of that goal, the country
risks another currency crisis. The central
bank has already burned through billions

of dollars in reserves to prop up the lira. It
may no longer have the means to defend
the currency in the face of sanctions, or if
global interest rates rise. Turks have run to
the dollar for safety. Foreign-currency deposits at Turkish banks have surged.
And lack of independence makes monetary policymakers’ job harder. “They have
a credibility issue,” says Kerim Rota, a former banker. Interest rates will need to be
higher to control inﬂation than if the market believed the central bank was in charge,
he says. But no one now thinks it can raise
rates without Mr Erdogan’s say-so. 7

Buttonwood VC after SoftBank
What happens when the wellspring of the best business ideas meets too much money

D

ealmakers are smooth talkers.
They need to be. But which branch of
ﬁnance has the slickest ones? Consider
the polished, public-school manner of
the City investment banker—or the
high-velocity spiel of the Wall Street
bank boss. Both have a strong claim. But
the venture capitalists, or vcs, of Silicon
Valley have a stronger one. They spend
their time either being pitched to by, or
pitching on behalf of, entrepreneurs who
hope to be the next Zuck or Larry-andSergey. Peddlers of such extravagant
dreams have to have silver tongues.
They certainly have some catchy
phrases. They speak of “vanity metrics”
(misleading measures of a startup’s
progress); of the importance of “productmarket ﬁt” (how well a piece of software
meets the customer’s needs); and “deal
heat”, the fever that causes investors to
overpay. After a while even a normally
buttoned-up Buttonwood is asking to
“double-click” on a topic when he wants
more detail from a voluble vc.
A subject guaranteed to get them
talking is the ﬂood of capital into Silicon
Valley. In the popular metaphor, the vc
business used to consist of a ﬂotilla of
small boats ﬁshing in a well-stocked
lake. It was all very collegial. Now the
lake is an ocean. Trawlers are out there—
big institutions, such as sovereignwealth funds and pension-fund managers, that increasingly invest directly in
technology ﬁrms before they reach public markets. The abundance of capital has
made the vc game more competitive. It
has also distorted the market for privately held ﬁrms.
That new ﬁrms are staying private for
longer is both a cause and a consequence
of this change. The deeper reasons for the
shift are debated. Some vc types put it all
down to regulations that made it costlier

to become a public company and easier to
remain a private one. Others place more
weight on the changing nature of new
ﬁrms, which need less capital than they
once did, both to start and to grow. The
building blocks for business software or
smartphone apps are freely available as
open-source code. Computing power can
be leased. The result is a shift in the balance of power from suppliers of capital
towards entrepreneurs, who want to be
spared the scrutiny of public markets.
Perhaps a more important shift than
the fall in demand for capital has been a
steady rise in its supply. The secular slump
in long-term interest rates, caused in part
by abundant savings, was given an extra
shove after the ﬁnancial crisis by central
banks’ easy-money policies. Yields on
listed stocks have fallen, too. The venturesome, noting the boom in the share prices
of tech stocks, moved into pre-ipo ﬁnancing in search of higher returns. Sums that
not so long ago could only be raised
through a stock-exchange listing are now
routinely raised privately.
One consequence has been a fall in the

number of listed companies. By the time
a tech startup goes public, its days of
supercharged revenue growth may be
over. This fear only fuels desperation to
get in on the act sooner. There is much
shaking of vc heads about the participation of institutions based back East in
even the early funding rounds for new
tech ﬁrms. vcs pride themselves on
pastoral care: the support, expertise and
contacts they provide to ﬂedgling ﬁrms.
What do “tourists” from Boston and New
York bring, apart from their big cheques?
As more and more money crams into
Silicon Valley, valuations inevitably
become inﬂated. Last month WeWork, an
oﬃce-sharing ﬁrm, was forced to pull its
ipo when public investors balked at the
price tag. A bail-out by SoftBank, WeWork’s main backer and a writer of big
cheques more generally, valued the ﬁrm
at $8bn. Yet a funding round in January
put the ﬁrm’s value at $47bn. “The damage done by SoftBank is incalculable,”
says one Silicon Valley bigwig. “If you
make a ﬁrm go faster, it does unnatural
things.” There is a growing sense that
capital is being wasted. “Businesses that
shouldn’t be funded are getting funded,”
says another vc. Sales and marketing
budgets are swollen. Firms lose track of
whether their product is any good.
Nevertheless a general view is that it
will take something dramatic—a meltdown in tech stocks or a sharp rise in
interest rates—to scare the money from
Silicon Valley. Big dreams are part of
venture capitalism. Everyone ﬁshing in
these crowded waters still hopes to land
a whale. Look at it another way, says a vc.
In 2012 Facebook paid $1bn for Instagram, a ﬁrm that had 13 employees and
was not yet two years old. That seemed
proﬂigate, he says. But with the beneﬁt of
hindsight, Facebook underpaid.

67

68

Finance & economics

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Money markets

Making the world go round

N E W YO R K

What caused September’s turmoil in the vast and essential repo market?

O

n september 17th, for the ﬁrst time in
a decade, the Federal Reserve intervened in the overnight repurchase, or
“repo” market, where banks and hedge
funds get short-term funding by swapping
$1trn-2trn of Treasuries for cash each day.
After the repo rate rose to 10%, the federalfunds rate, at which banks can borrow from
each other, climbed above the Fed’s target
(see chart). The Fed swooped in, oﬀering
$75bn-worth of overnight funding, and
both rates came back down. But it has had
to keep lending to stop them rising again.
During October it said it would lend for longer periods, increased its limit on overnight repo operations to at least $120bn and
started buying short-dated Treasuries directly, at a pace of $60bn per month.
The turmoil indicated an unexpected
shortage of liquidity in the ﬁnancial system. Before the ﬁnancial crisis the Fed had
controlled the federal-funds rate using a
“corridor”, with a ceiling and ﬂoor. Banks
could borrow at the ceiling rate, but the
ﬂoor rate was zero, meaning cash held at
the Fed earned nothing. To keep interest
rates on-target the Fed used “open-market”
operations, swapping Treasuries and cash.
The crisis changed everything. The Fed
added investment funds and securities
dealers to the list of approved borrowers in
the repo market and, using quantitative
easing (qe), bought vast quantities of longdated Treasury bonds. Its balance-sheet
ballooned to $4.5trn. Holders of Treasuries, mostly banks, ended up with cash
mountains. To keep market interest rates
on target, the Fed raised the ﬂoor rate. The
ceiling became redundant, as did repomarket operations. Regulations intended
to avoid another bail-out forced banks to
hold more cash and safe liquid assets, such
as Treasuries.
Under the old system, if commercial
banks were short of cash the quantity they
sought on the repo market would rise.
When cash became superabundant the Fed
lost any insight into banks’ thinking about
how much cash they needed to hold. Now
the repo-market turmoil has given an answer—and it is far higher than the Fed expected. Collectively, America’s commercial
banks now hold $1.3trn of cash.
Even that does not seem to be enough.
Demand for cash grows with the economy.
And demand from the government is growing particularly fast because of the ﬁscal
deﬁcit, which will reach $1trn next year,

4.7% of gdp. The Treasury is therefore issuing lots more bills and bonds, which ﬁnancial ﬁrms and investors purchase with
cash. But buyers are becoming scarcer, especially foreign ones. High policy rates in
America have pushed up hedging costs, deterring European and Japanese pension
funds from buying Treasuries. Since 2017
the share of Treasuries held by foreigners
has fallen from 40% to 35%.
That has left more for American buyers
to mop up. “Primary dealers”—banks authorised to deal Treasuries directly with
the government—bear the brunt of these
market forces. Their holdings of Treasuries
have ballooned. In 2017 they held $200bnworth of Treasuries outright, and ﬁnanced
positions worth an additional $1.5trn in the
repo market. By September this year these
ﬁgures had risen to $250bn and $2trn respectively. When repo rates spiked in September it was because primary dealers
could not borrow enough cash to cover
their positions. Commercial banks will
usually lend as much cash as primary dealers need, but as their cash piles dwindled
they grew more reluctant to do so.
Three ways to avert another repo-market meltdown are being discussed. Postcrisis regulations concerning banks’ cash

holdings could be tweaked. The Fed could
commit to continuing repo operations. Or
it could buy short-dated Treasuries outright. All are politically contentious.
Some bankers say they hold more cash
than legally required because they fear that
miscalculating and having to borrow from
the Fed would damage their reputations.
Steven Mnuchin, the treasury secretary,
has said it might be possible to change the
rules in such a way as to increase liquidity
without increasing risk. But any change
would draw heavy political crossﬁre. On
October 18th Elizabeth Warren, a leading
contender for the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination, wrote to Mr Mnuchin
urging him not to relax the rules.
Before the crisis, large-scale lending by
the Fed in the repo market caused little
concern. But now that more lightly regulated institutions, such as investment funds,
can borrow too, repo-market operations
are bound to attract more scrutiny. For this
reason, among others, the Fed wants them
to be the exception, not the rule. It has already accepted that it will have to start increasing its balance-sheet again, by buying
$60bn-worth of short-dated Treasuries per
month. Critics (wrongly) claim this is qe by
stealth. But the Fed had hoped to see the
balance-sheet shrink further, to give it
room for manoeuvre in any future crisis.
The repo market’s wobbles have revealed not only banks’ huge appetite for
cash, but the unforeseen consequences of
post-crisis prudential regulation. Those
wobbles, and the Fed’s reaction, do not necessarily indicate that America’s ﬁnancial
system is imperilled. That the Fed was
blindsided is far more worrying. 7

Repo, man
United States
Interest rates, spread over the Fed policy
rate lower bound, percentage points

Primary-dealer net treasury positions, $bn
3

Secured overnight financing*

Federal-funds
2018

2

100

0

0

-1

-100

2019

2015

16

18

19

2.0

5

1.5

4
3

1.0

2

0.5

Overnight

Excess reserves of
depositary institutions

0
17

17

Federal Reserve, total liabilities, $trn

Long-term

16

200

1

Treasuries financed using repo†, $trn

2015

300

T-bills
Treasuries† under 2 years
Treasuries† over 2 years

18

19

Sources: Bloomberg; Federal Reserve Bank of New York; Federal Reserve

2007

09

11

13

15

17

1
0
19

*Closely tracks the repo rate
†Including inﬂation-protected securities

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Finance & economics

Free exchange It ain’t over till it’s over

A scholar of inequality ponders the future of capitalism

W

hen communism fell, that was supposed to be that. History
would continue, but arguments about how to organise society seemed to have been settled. Yet even as capitalism has
strengthened its hold on the global economy, history’s verdict has
come to seem less ﬁnal. In a new book, “Capitalism, Alone”, Branko
Milanovic of the Stone Centre on Socioeconomic Inequality at the
City University of New York argues that this uniﬁcation of humankind under a single social system lends support to the view of history as a march towards progress. But the belief that liberal capitalism will prove to be the destination has been weakened by
ﬁnancial and political dysfunction in the rich world, and by the
rise of China. Its triumph cannot be taken for granted.
Mr Milanovic outlines a taxonomy of capitalisms and traces
their evolution from classical capitalism before 1914, through the
social-democratic capitalism of the mid-20th century, to “liberal
meritocratic capitalism” in much of the rich world, in particular
America. He contrasts this with the “political capitalism” found in
many emerging countries, with China as the exemplar. These two
capitalistic forms now dominate the global landscape. Their coevolution will shape world history for decades to come.
Liberal meritocratic capitalism is generally associated with liberal political systems and, though redder in tooth and claw than its
social-democratic forebear, is more egalitarian than classical capitalism, thanks to welfare states inherited from social democrats.
Its distinguishing feature is a tolerance for inequality that derives
from the way in which riches, in a meritocratic system, are earned
by people of extraordinary talent. Political capitalism, in contrast,
is illiberal. It emerges when authoritarian governments rely for legitimacy on their ability to foster economic growth, which in turn
provides the motive for free-market reforms.
It is wrong to suppose, though, that systems of political capitalism will inevitably become more politically liberal, as Western
leaders once hoped would happen in China. They rely on a “zone of
lawlessness” that allows the state to suppress uppity private-sector interest groups. The rule of law, as it holds in most advanced
economies, would enable a merchant class to become a new centre
of power that could press for political reforms, thus limiting the
actions of the ruling elite. The zone of lawlessness also allows the

state to suppress corruption—endemic under political capitalism—whenever it threatens to undercut economic growth.
Whether political capitalism does better than liberal capitalism at
fostering growth remains unclear (Mr Milanovic implies at times
that it may). China and Vietnam have grown much faster than
America in recent decades, but as their incomes rise and opportunities to learn from others dissipate, they will probably slow.
Whether or not political capitalism is better for growth, it appears to be sustainable—at least for a while. The global status quo
may not be, however. Slower growth in China may eventually
erode the legitimacy of the ruling party. And liberal systems may
converge toward authoritarian ones, rather than the other way
round. As Mr Milanovic writes, structural forces within liberal
meritocratic capitalism work towards greater inequality. Older
vintages of capitalism tended to separate those rich in capital and
those with high incomes from labour into separate classes. But in
liberal meritocratic capitalism the two groups are coterminous,
because the wealthy invest heavily in their children’s education
and the talented earn huge sums. The elite uses its economic power to cultivate political power, pushing societies toward the establishment of a permanent ruling class that cannot be dislodged.
Intergenerational economic mobility in America has indeed
fallen. Political spending has soared and is dominated by the very
rich. In 2016 the top 1% of the top 1% accounted for 40% of campaign donations. These ﬁnancially astute people surely expect a
return on their money, and indeed research suggests that elected
leaders are more attuned to the interests of the rich than those of
people further down the income scale. Other aspects of political
capitalism are creeping in, too. One is corruption, from the pay-toplay proclivities of the Trump administration to the tendency of
both Democrats and Republicans to leap from government service
straight into lucrative private-sector jobs.
Behind this, Mr Milanovic suggests, is an erosion of liberal values. Within capitalist systems, money is the ultimate measure of
worth. The pursuit of narrow self-interest is held to lead to the
greatest good. People who forgo proﬁt for ethical reasons could
thus be seen as harming society, because they are preventing resources from being used at maximum eﬃciency. Moreover, their
restraint creates an opening for less ethical rivals. The elite in such
a system increasingly consists of individuals who are willing to do
anything not outright illegal that increases their wealth.
Value at risk
There is something to be said for an amoral approach to business.
As Mr Milanovic points out, people all over the world understand
the pursuit of self-interest. Amoral commerce can be engaged in
by people from many cultures and backgrounds; recent hyperglobalisation would not have been possible without it. But the costs
are becoming apparent—when ﬁrms bow to Chinese censorship
in order to retain access to lucrative markets, for example, or when
governments accept ﬂagrant tax avoidance as the price of unimpeded capital ﬂows.
The ugly aspects of today’s capitalism, like those of the 19thcentury version, may be merely an awkward bump on the road to a
better world. But it is also possible that the apparent march of progress, from coarser versions of capitalism to better ones, was not a
historical inevitability. It may instead reﬂect the painstaking cultivation of liberal values, such as honesty and the duty to treat others fairly. If so, capitalism alone, without the moderating inﬂuence of those values, could reach its own historical dead end. 7

69

MORAL INJURY IS A WAR INSIDE
No one should fight alone
Imagine a nurse who blames herself for losing a patient. She questions her own self-worth
and abuses painkillers to numb the constant emotional stress. She’s one of the many who
struggle with Moral Injury. At Volunteers of America, we can help her find peace.

Learn more at VOA.ORG

Science & technology

The Economist November 2nd 2019

71

Also in this section
72 Quantum computing
73 Livestock, seaweed and methane
73 Better reinforced concrete
74 How science works

Human origins

Eden?

An intriguing piece of human history seems to be emerging

N

orthern botswana is a land of
strange contrast. Drive west from Francistown, the country’s second city, and you
skirt Makgadikgadi, a white, salt-encrusted plain that is bone dry for most of the
year, but which blossoms into sudden,
abundant life during the wet season. Follow the road farther and you arrive at
Maun, on the edge of the lush inland delta
of the Okavango river, the fourth-longest in
southern Africa. Two hundred thousand
years ago, though, Makgadikgadi was also
lush. Both it and the delta were part of a
lake, then the largest in Africa, surrounded
by wetlands. For wildlife, the result was a
veritable paradise—and also for people,
for, if the latest research is correct in its
claims, an intriguing episode in humanity’s origins was played out there.
That Homo sapiens began as an African
species was pretty-much proved in the
1980s by Allan Wilson of the University of
California, Berkeley. He developed what
has come to be known as the Mitochondri-

al Eve hypothesis by looking at a special
type of dna which is passed, unmixed by
sexual reproduction, from a mother to her
children. This so-called mitogenome is independent of a cell’s nucleus, where the
rest of the genes are found. It resides in
structures called mitochondria that are the
descendants of once-free-living bacteria
and which now act symbiotically as a cell’s
power packs.
Wilson’s research showed that the family trees of present-day human mitogenomes, their branches caused by mutations over the millennia, converge in a way
which makes clear that their common ancestor lived in Africa. Hence the nickname
Mitochondrial Eve. This woman was by no
means the ﬁrst human being. But everyone
now alive can claim descent from her.
What is true for Eve is also true for
Adam. Part of the dna on the y-chromosome, which is passed unmixed from father to son, can be used to draw up a similar
tree that is also rooted in Africa. Where, ex-

actly, y-chromosomal Adam resided has
not yet been established. But as they describe this week in Nature, a group of researchers led by Vanessa Hayes of the Garvan Institute in Sydney, Australia, think
they have found that Mitochondrial
Eve—or, at least, people closely related to
her—lived for tens of thousands of years in
splendid isolation in northern Botswana.
That northern Botswana was a habitat
of early humans has been known for years.
Makgadikgadi is littered with stone tools
dropped there aeons ago by Palaeolithic
hominids. Which particular hominids,
however, is not clear. Unlike later artefacts,
Palaeolithic tools are not species-speciﬁc.
Though they were invented about 1.8m
years ago by Homo erectus, an early human
that spread over Africa and Asia, they were
also used by erectus’s numerous daughter
species, one line of which leads eventually
to Homo sapiens.
People of the lake
The story that Dr Hayes and her colleagues
are proposing is that, whoever might have
been living there beforehand, by 200,000
years ago the land around Lake Makgadikgadi was indeed occupied by Homo sapiens.
For the following 70,000 years these people evolved in isolation, penned into their
homeland by desertlike surroundings.
Then, in two bursts—one 130,000 years ago
and the other 110,000 years ago—they were 1

72

Science & technology

The Economist November 2nd 2019

2 unleashed on the wider world.

Mitogenomic ancestral trees are made
by looking for typos in the sequences of genetic “letters” in mitogenomes—places in
the dna where a single chemical base differs from one individual to another. Because mitogenomes do not recombine during sex, these changes are all the results of
random mutations. By comparing mitogenomes, it is possible to work out in what order the mutations happened. And because
even random processes have measurable
averages, it is also possible to estimate
when a particular mutation arose.
Follow the branches of the human mitogenomic tree back through time and they
converge on a group of mitogenomes
known as l0. This group is largely conﬁned
to southern Africa. It is the characteristic
mitogenome of the Khoesan people, who
long predate the arrival in the area of both
Bantu from farther north in Africa and
Europeans from overseas. Dr Hayes and her
colleagues therefore gathered all of the existing versions of l0 that they could ﬁnd,
and also collected 198 new ones, to bring together a total of 1,217 variants from which
they sought to reﬁne the ancestral tree.
With that information, and data about
where the samples were collected, maps of
how people who share l0 spread can be
constructed. And that is what Dr Hayes and
her colleagues did. The branches of their
new tree converge in time about 200,000
years ago. In space, they converge on
northern Botswana.
The tree also suggests that the l0 population lived in one place for perhaps 70,000
years before part of it moved south-west,
and a further period of about 20,000 years
before another part moved north-east. This
suggestion of an isolated population that
underwent two outward migrations is supported by work by Dr Hayes’s collaborator,
Axel Timmermann of the Institute for Basic Science in Busan, South Korea. He is a
500 km

Leaving home
Migration routes from Makgadikgadi

KENYA

CONGO

2nd migration,
110,000 years ago

TANZANIA

ANGOLA

Okavango
Makgadikgadi
wetland

MALAWI

ZAMBIA

Maun

NAMIBIA

ZIMBABWE

MOZAMBIQUE

Makgadikgadi Pans
Francistown

BOTSWANA
SOUTH
AFRICA

Source: Nature

ESWATINI
LESOTHO

1st migration,
130,000 years ago

climatologist and has pieced together,
from paleogeographic and astronomical
evidence, a history of Makgadikgadi and its
surroundings. In particular, he has looked
at the eﬀects on the climate there of the
shifts in Earth’s orbit and axial spin that
cause ice ages.
His conclusion is that for most of this
time Lake Makgadikgadi was surrounded
by desert, but that this encircling wall was
twice penetrated by green corridors along
which animals, people included, would
have been able to migrate. The ﬁrst corridor
opened 130,000 years ago to the southwest. The second, 110,000 years ago to the
north-east.
The mitogenomic and climatic data
thus seem to match. The south-western

dispersal would have carried the ancestors
of today’s l0 individuals into other parts of
southern Africa. In particular, it would explain the traces of habitation along South
Africa’s coast that date from shortly after.
It was the north-eastern dispersal,
though, that unleashed the children of
Makgadikgadi on the wider world. Their
descendants spread through what is now
Zambia and into the rest of Africa, interbreeding with people already living there,
including the descendants of y-chromosomal Adam, as they merged into the wider
gene-pool of humanity. Indeed, the history
of human nuclear genes resembles a web
more than it does a tree, which is one reason Wilson sought the clarity of the mitogenome in the ﬁrst place.
1

Quantum computing

Not so fast
A challenge to a big result in quantum computing

I

t was hailed by many, including The
Economist, as a landmark result in
quantum computing. In September a
scientiﬁc paper appeared accidentally on
a nasa webpage. In it a team of researchers at Google described how they had
used a quantum computer to complete,
in three minutes, a calculation that
would have taken a classical machine
10,000 years to crunch through. This
feat, they claimed, marked the ﬁrst demonstration of “quantum supremacy”—
using a quantum computer to tackle a
task unfeasible for a classical one.
On October 23rd the paper reappeared, intentionally this time, in Nature. But a few days before that some
researchers at ibm—which, like Google
and several other information-technology ﬁrms, including Intel and Microsoft, is also conducting quantum-computing research—posted their own paper
to arXiv, an online repository. In it, they
cast doubt on Google’s claim.
The task that Google’s engineers
tested their machine with is called circuit sampling. It involves measuring the
outputs of randomly wired circuits made
of qubits, the quantum-mechanical
analogues of the classical bits that lie at
the heart of conventional computing.
In truth, circuit sampling is a toy
problem with little practical use. Google
picked it as a demonstration because it is
mightily diﬃcult for a classical machine
to do at all, whereas a well-behaved
quantum computer ﬁnds it trivial. Moreover, the contest becomes exponentially
more unequal as the number of qubits in
the quantum machine goes up.
Google used a 53-qubit machine. The

classical-computing yardstick against
which its performance was putatively
measured was Summit, a machine at Oak
Ridge National Laboratory that is, at the
moment, the fastest in the world. Google’s engineers did not, however, actually
do the experiment. Rather, they arrived
at the ﬁgure of 10,000 years by extrapolating from easier versions of the task.
Not so fast, said ibm—or, rather, not
so slow. The chief problem Summit faced
is that when simulating 53-qubit circuits
it would run out of memory. This means
that, were anyone actually trying to run
the simulation, they would have to use a
less memory-hungry but much slower
algorithm to do so. ibm pointed out that
Summit also has plenty of hard-disk
space. Although not usually counted as
memory, this could nonetheless be
pressed into service. Doing so, combined
with a few tweaks to the algorithm,
would, ibm’s engineers reckon, allow
Summit to breeze through the job in a
mere 2½ days. Therefore, according to
ibm, Google had not shown quantum
supremacy after all.
Technically, ibm is right. How much it
matters is another question. Two and a
half days is, after all, still about 1,200
times longer than 3 minutes. Second,
each extra qubit doubles the memory
required by a classical machine put up
against it. Adding just three qubits to
Google’s challenger machine would have
exhausted Summit’s hard disks. Quantum computers do not face such explosively growing demands. Google’s machine may not quite have crossed the
ﬁnishing line. But it has got pretty close
to doing so.

The Economist November 2nd 2019

2

Eventually, about 50 millennia after
these events, some intrepid adventurers
crossed to Asia, took up residence there,
and thence spread to Australia, Europe and
the Americas. The dna of these travellers
was further changed by interbreeding with
at least two other species of human: Neanderthals in Europe and Denisovans in Asia.
Not everyone believes Dr Hayes’s version of history. The further back the human
mitogenomic tree is traced, they point out,
the more uncertainty creeps into it, so further investigation would be desirable. But
the mix of evidence, genetic and climatic,
that she and her colleagues present does
paint quite a plausible picture of the experiences of one particular branch of modern
people’s ancient ancestors. 7
Curbing greenhouse-gas emissions

Pardon!
H A M I LTO N , N E W Z E A L A N D

The answer to livestock that burp
methane may be seaweed

A

ncient greek writings describe livestock eating seaweed, as do Icelandic
sagas. And, as the picture shows, sheep on
North Ronaldsay, in the Orkney Islands of
Scotland, still graze on the stuﬀ. But that is
now seen as unusual. It may not be in the
future, however, as research conducted in
Australia and New Zealand suggests algavory of this sort may reduce greenhousegas emissions from stock animals.
The research in question is being co-ordinated by csiro, Australia’s main science
agency. The project is looking into mi-

Ovine seafood

Science & technology

crobes that inhabit the stomachs of ruminants such as cattle and sheep. These bugs
transform those animals’ ﬁbrous fare into
energy-rich molecules, some of which the
host animal is able to absorb and utilise.
One energy-rich molecule that is not
absorbed, though, is methane. Instead, the
animals belch it into the atmosphere.
Which is a problem, because methane is a
greenhouse gas that has a warming eﬀect
28 times as powerful as carbon dioxide’s.
Since this loss of methane also deprives the
host of the energy therein, thus probably
reducing its growth rate, controlling methanogenic bacterial activity in ruminants
looks like a beneﬁcial twofer.
The antimethanogenic powers of Asparagopsis, the seaweed in question, were
discovered in 2016 and experiments involving it have been going on since then.
One of the latest, published in October in
the Journal of Cleaner Production, showed
that dairy cows eating a diet containing 1%
Asparagopsis produce only a third of the
methane belched by cows on seaweedless
diets. Since a cow has about the same
greenhouse eﬀect as a car, cutting the
emissions of even a portion of the world’s
1.5bn cattle would bring great beneﬁt. Furthermore, according to Michael Battaglia,
who directs csiro’s agriculture and global
change programme, soon-to-be-published
work shows that seaweed-fed beef cattle
grew, as predicted, faster than their seaweedless confrères.
The methane-diminishing eﬀect of Asparagopsis is caused by a compound called
bromoform, in which the algae are rich.
Bromoform blocks one of the enzymes that
methanogens use to create the gas. The obvious solution to the problem might therefore seem to be to add this chemical directly to animal feed. That might work in

73

principle (no one has yet tried), but in practice would require a lot of safety trials and,
if those came back positive, a change in the
regulations. It would also risk a backlash by
consumers, who might perceive adding
bromoform as adulteration of some sort.
The alternative is to cultivate seaweed,
rather than gathering it from the wild, in
order to provide the quantities that will be
needed if the idea of adding Asparagopsis to
feed becomes popular. And New Zealand’s
government is proposing to do precisely
that. It has just made money available for
people who hope to develop ways to farm
Asparagopsis. Exactly how this will work
remains to be seen. But the idea of adding a
new crop to the world’s agriculture, and a
marine one to boot, is intriguing. 7
Civil engineering

Curing concrete
cancer
Two Australian bridges try to stand the
test of time

M

odern civilisation is built on concrete and steel. Put the two together,
though, and you can generate a problem.
Reinforcing concrete with steel rods called
rebars is the basis of modern construction.
But because water gets in through tiny
cracks, the rebars rust. This causes them to
expand, widening the cracks and weakening the concrete. Hence such structures require constant attention and often have design lives of only 60-100 years. That is
pitiful compared with, say, the concrete
dome of the Pantheon in Rome—which
was completed in 125ad and still stands.
Various ways of delaying or preventing
concrete cancer, as this corrosion is known
colloquially, have been tried. These include recipes for concrete that is less permeable to water, and rebars made from
rust-resistant materials such as stainlesssteel or composites. Such approaches
work, but they can be expensive.
This may be about to change. Next year,
if all goes well, a pair of footbridges intended to be cancer-proof will open in Geelong,
a town 75km south-west of Melbourne,
Australia. These bridges, which will act as
prototypes for more than 150 others
planned for the expanding city, will be constructed using a novel approach that combines glass-ﬁbre and carbon-ﬁbre rebars.
They will, though, cost about the same as
equivalent conventional bridges.
The new design is the brainchild of a
joint team of researchers from Deakin, a local university, and Austeng, the ﬁrm contracted to build the bridges. This team began with commercially available rebars 1

74

Science & technology

2 made from carbon-ﬁbre composite. Al-

though these are as strong as steel ones,
they are expensive. They are, therefore,
most often used in specialist structures
such as buildings to house mri hospital
scanners, where electromagnetic interference from metal can cause problems.
To get around this the team have worked
out how to minimise cost by using carbonﬁbre rebars only where strictly necessary.
In other places they use glass ﬁbre, which is
cheaper. The result is a frame that acts as a
skeleton for precast concrete sections
which can then be assembled into a bridge.
According to Mahbube Subhani, one of
the researchers at Deakin, a three-metrelong version of such a section has just been
tested and has passed local building codes.
The group is now pressing ahead with the
ﬁrst of the ten-metre sections needed to
construct the bridges themselves.
The new castings are, as was hoped,
both stronger and lighter than steel-reinforced concrete. Tests showed that the prototype’s load-carrying capacity was 20%
better, even though its cross-section was
15% smaller. Production costs are “a little
bit higher”, Dr Subhani admits. But in the
long run, he says, the bridges will work out
cheaper because they should last for at
least 100 years without any maintenance
being required.
They will also be more environmentally
friendly, for the concrete surrounding the
skeleton is unconventional, too. Normal
concrete is bound with Portland cement,
which is made by roasting a mixture that
includes limestone (calcium carbonate).
This process drives oﬀ carbon dioxide, a

The Economist November 2nd 2019

greenhouse gas, and cement-making is a
big source of such emissions.
Geelong’s bridges, by contrast, will be
made with geopolymer concrete. This uses
cement made from a diﬀerent mixture of
ingredients, including furnace ﬂy-ash,
which do not release carbon dioxide when
being processed.
Further down the line Deakin’s researchers are looking into making rebars
out of basalt, an abundant volcanic rock, by
melting it and extruding it into ﬁbres. That
How science works

Slow. But sure

The scientiﬁc method has come under scrutiny. But it works. Eventually

I

n november 2015 a team of psychologists led by Jean Decety of the University
of Chicago published an unexpected ﬁnding. Based on an experiment involving coloured stickers (trinkets valued by the children who took part) they concluded that
youngsters living in religious households
are less generous than those who dwell in
non-religious households. Many news outlets, including The Economist, reported this
result—precisely because it was so surprising. It turns out, though, that it was wrong.
In August Current Biology, the journal
which published the original paper, published a retraction, saying:
An error in this article, our incorrect inclusion of country of origin as a covariate in
many analyses, was pointed out in a correspondence from Shariﬀ, Willard, Muthukrishna, Kramer and Henrich. When we
reanalysed these data to correct this error,
we found that country of origin, rather than
religious aﬃliation, is the primary predictor
of several of the outcomes.

What have the Romans done for us?

could provide a cheaper and greener alternative to carbon ﬁbres, which are usually
made from oil-based polymers. Some commercial basalt-ﬁbre composites are already
available, but the team think they can improve the performance of such ﬁbres further, by adding other materials.
Coincidentally, one of the ingredients
of the Pantheon’s concrete dome is pumice,
another volcanic rock. Whether basalt-ﬁbre concrete will similarly stand the test of
time only future architects will know. 7

Still an interesting result, then. But not
what had originally been claimed. Translating the retraction’s jargon, Dr Decety and
his colleagues were confessing to the fact
that the numerical codes they had assigned
to the various countries involved in the
study (1=usa, 2=Canada and so on) had
been incorporated by accident into the calculation, and had thus thrown the result
out of whack.
The road to this retraction shows both
what is good and what is bad about the way
the modern scientiﬁc method works. The
good is that the error was exposed, and has
been acknowledged by the paper’s authors.
The bad is that it took four years for the retraction to happen.
The error was originally spotted by
Azim Shariﬀ, a psychologist at the University of British Columbia, in Canada. Dr Sha-

riﬀ read Dr Decety’s paper and noted that its
ﬁndings clashed with many of his own observations. These suggested that a religious upbringing increased kindness towards others, rather than decreasing it.
That led Dr Shariﬀ to ask Dr Decety for his
data so that he, Dr Shariﬀ, could analyse
them in detail to try and work out why their
conclusions clashed. Dr Decety obliged. Dr
Shariﬀ discovered the coding error. And,
based on that discovery, he reported his results in Current Biology in August 2016.
Current Biology’s publishers, Cell Press,
felt that was enough. The original mistake
was in the public domain and everyone
could now get on with life. It did, though,
mean that Dr Decety’s paper remained in
the literature, possibly confusing those
who had not read Dr Shariﬀ’s. And that was
the case until a new, unrelated paper, published by Nature in March, drew attention
to Dr Decety’s work and created an outcry
on social media for the matter to be addressed. A few months later, after discussion with Dr Decety, Current Biology retracted the paper.
It is often observed that news media are
keen to publicise extraordinary-sounding
results, but lose interest in subsequent
work—and actually ignore retractions.
There is truth in that, though it is also true
that journals often fail to draw attention to
such matters. Whatever the reason, according to a report that came out in Psychology Today in September, though more than
80 publications reported on the original
ﬁndings, Dr Shariﬀ’s follow-up was covered at the time by a mere four outlets.
The happy ending is that Dr Decety has
spent the intervening period collecting yet
more data on the matter, and that he and Dr
Shariﬀ are now collaborating to analyse
those data. When they publish, we will endeavour to cover it. 7

Books & arts

The Economist November 2nd 2019

East German art

Wire in the blood

COT T B U S

Thirty years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, East German art is causing a stir

A

new trend swept through East Germany’s underground art scene in the
1980s: window blinds. Called “Rollos” in
German, these foldable, commercial blinds
were an instant hit as an alternative to traditional canvases. They were cheap and
widely available, an important consideration in a pinched socialist economy. They
were visually interesting, and fun to paint
on. And, crucially, they were perfect for
evading censors.
Artists painted on Rollos, then unfolded them in spontaneous group shows in
churches or homes. Then they stashed
them away again before the authorities
could intervene. After the Berlin Wall fell in
November 1989, the ﬂimsy material remained popular, capturing, as it seemed to,
the mood of upheaval and transience.
Some artists hoarded blank Rollos, utilising them long after the German Democratic
Republic (gdr) expired.
Rollo art is one of many bold creative experiments that undercut the gdr’s reputation as a desert of dour Socialist Realism.

Long derided as the obsolete propaganda of
a collapsed state, gdr-era art is now experiencing a revival. Several major shows have
introduced it to a wider audience; prices
for some artists are rising. Alongside
names that were already celebrated in the
socialist era, less well-known aspects of
East Germany’s creative legacy are belatedly winning attention. It helps that the gdr’s
rebels, especially its female artists, tackled
issues that continue to be relevant: surveillance, gender inequality, self-discovery
and sexual liberation. Their subversive and
often humorous paintings, performances,
prints, collages and texts have lost none of
their provocative power.
Also in this section
76 Seeking solace in Siena
77 The vision of H.G. Wells
77 A history of the Lakota
78 Johnson: Automated writing

75

“Making art ourselves, that was a lifeline,” says Gabriele Stötzer, one of the gdr’s
most radical writers and artists, from her
home in the East German city of Erfurt. “Art
needs a public, and we were at least our
own public.” As a young woman, Ms Stötzer
was imprisoned for signing a petition in
support of Wolf Biermann, a dissident
singer. After her release, she says, she was
no longer afraid of anything. She ran an underground gallery, which was shut down by
the Stasi. All around her, she saw her fellow
artists being silenced, exiled, driven to depression or suicide. Through art, she reminded herself that she existed. She made
her own clothes, and her own plates and
cups. She covered herself with ketchup and
pressed herself against a wall, “just to leave
a trace, just to see that I am here.”
Together with other women, she experimented with ﬁlm, photography, performance, concertina books and Rollos. In
1989 she helped storm the Stasi’s local
headquarters in Erfurt, preventing its
goons from destroying their surveillance
ﬁles. She knew the building, having been
held in solitary conﬁnement and interrogated there. “These days I’ve been rehabilitated a bit,” Ms Stötzer says wryly. “As an
artist, I now have one show after another.”
For many, such recognition was a long
time coming. After Germany reuniﬁed in
1990, it was not just state-supported artists
from the gdr who found themselves adrift.
Many alternative spirits also struggled to 1

76

Books & arts

2 adjust to the West’s competitive, individ-

ualistic art market. “They thought, ‘Now
our time has come.’ But no one was interested in these artists,” says Hilke Wagner,
director of the Albertinum museum in
Dresden. The Albertinum hosted the gdr’s
oﬃcial art exhibitions and collected established artists. One museum consistently
bought East German avant-garde art before
and after the Wall fell: the Brandenburg
State Museum of Modern Art (blmk),
which has sites in Cottbus and Frankfurt an
der Oder. Here, in provincial cities close to
the Polish border, on the political and cultural margins, curators were freer.
Now Brandenburg is reaping the rewards of saving treasures that others neglected. “I don’t even want to put this gdr
label on everything. We look at it as art,”
says Ulrike Kremeier, the blmk’s director.
On a recent tour of one of its buildings, the
Dieselkraftwerk in Cottbus, she proudly
gestured at rooms ﬁlled with big, vibrant
Rollos. Four by Angela Hampel show a sequence of falling women. Another, by Sabine Herrmann, depicts a woman kneeling
and bowing her head as if to shake out her
hair. The museum owns a unique collection of gdr-era photography, as well as its
trove of Rollos. It bought early paintings by
A.R. Penck and Neo Rauch, now known
around the world, and works by women
such as Ms Stötzer, Cornelia Schleime, Doris Ziegler and Sigrid Noack.
Walls have eyes
These days, glitzier institutions borrow
from this hoard. Works by Ms Stötzer are on
loan at the Galerie für Zeitgenössische
Kunst in Leipzig. Other pieces are due to be
shown in an exhibition at the Albertinum
next year. Word has spread farther aﬁeld,
too. In 2018 a team from the Museum of
Modern Art in New York visited Cottbus to
study the collection. Female artists from
countries behind the Iron Curtain, including the gdr, are at the heart of a show at the
Wende Museum in Culver City, California,
which opens on November 10th (the day
after the Wall fell). Susanne Altmann, the
curator, says these women took aesthetic
as well as political risks: “To paint on ﬁlm,
to paint on photos, to paint on Rollos, these
are all aesthetic transgressions that required a lot of courage.”
The resulting work reﬂects the repressive circumstances of its creation. When
Ms Schleime was banned from exhibiting
her paintings and drawings, she turned to
performance art, using her own body as
material. She stripped naked and painted
eyes on herself. She wrapped herself in
wire. “You can’t tear the body oﬀ a wall”, she
commented, “the way oﬃcials once tore
down a drawing of mine.” A certain pragmatism is also characteristic of the era.
Christine Schlegel, whose colourful Rollos
feature at the Wende Museum, initially

The Economist November 2nd 2019

started painting on window blinds to enliven her child’s bedroom, says Ms Altmann. When she left for the West, she took
her Rollos with her.
Yet despite this bygone historical context, many of these works feel surprisingly
timely. A photo of Ms Schleime covered
with painted-on eyes could be a comment
on privacy and exposure in the internet
age. Annemirl Bauer’s “Untitled (Woman
and Child behind Bars and Barbed Wire)”,
painted on a discarded wardrobe door in
1985 (see previous page), is reminiscent of
latter-day images of migrant families de-

tained at the American border. In Cottbus
experimental photography from the 1980s
was recently juxtaposed with a new series
of photos of former neo-Nazis having their
tattoos removed.
The gdr’s rebel artists show no signs of
quietening down. A Rollo that Ms Hampel
painted in 2010 presents a deﬁant, redhaired woman reaching out as if to warn
the viewer. Decades after reuniﬁcation, she
continued painting on the blinds. She no
longer needed to outfox censors; she had
simply grown fond of the Rollos, everyday
objects that could be turned into art. 7

Painting and life

Art therapy
A writer seeks solace—and answers—in frescoes
matar was a businessman and
Jaballa
dissident in Muammar Qadaﬃ’s Libya. In
1979 he ﬂed to Cairo with his family. One afternoon in 1990, when his son Hisham was
19 and studying in London, Jaballa was
“kidnapped, bundled into an unmarked
airplane and ﬂown back to Libya. He was
imprisoned and gradually, like salt dissolving in water, was made to vanish.”
Jaballa has been missing ever since, an
absence that has been the central preoccupation of Hisham Matar’s work. He wrote
about it in “The Return” (2017), which
chronicles a journey to the country of his
birth and his attempt to trace his father
(who may yet be alive), or to ﬁnd out what
happened to him (more likely, he was one
of the estimated1,270 victims of the massacre at Abu Salim prison in 1996).
“The Return” won a Pulitzer prize, but in
terms of Mr Matar’s questions, it comes up
empty-handed, the answers remaining
elusive. “A Month in Siena”, a slim bewitching meditation on art, history and the relationship between them, oﬀers some of the
resolution that its author is still seeking, if
not in the form he originally hoped for.

From Tripoli to Tuscany

A Month in Siena. By Hisham Matar.
Random House; 126 pages; $27. Viking; £12.99

Mr Matar’s pilgrimage to Siena and his
quest to unravel the disappearance are not
as unrelated as they may at ﬁrst seem.
Around the same time that he “lost” his father, and “for reasons that still remain unclear to me now”, he writes, “I began to visit
the National Gallery in London every day
during my lunch break.” He became fascinated by the work of Duccio di Buoninsegna, a Sienese painter, whose “Annunciation” and “Jesus Opens the Eyes of a Man
Born Blind” are in the gallery’s collection.
For Mr Matar, Duccio was a gateway to the
rest of the Sienese School, which emerged
in the 13th century and lasted into the 15th,
and which stands apart from other contemporary movements, “neither Byzantine
nor of the Renaissance, an anomaly between chapters, like the orchestra tuning
its strings in the interval”.
The Tuscan city of Siena itself appeals to
Mr Matar for having favoured civic rule at a
time when many other Italian city-states 1

The Economist November 2nd 2019
2 were controlled by the Catholic church or

the aristocracy. The paintings that he travels to Siena to see, during the sojourn of
his title, reﬂect this context. They are the
three frescoes by Ambrogio Lorenzetti that
were commissioned for the Palazzo Pubblico (town hall) in 1338: “Allegory of Good
Government”, “The Eﬀects of Good Government” (see previous page) and “The Eﬀects
of Bad Government”. Mr Matar goes repeatedly to the Palazzo Pubblico to look at the
frescoes, admiring their celebration of civil
society. Besides their political import, visiting them is an opportunity “to grieve
alone, to consider the new terrain and to
work out how I might continue from here”.
He takes Italian lessons, cooks himself
baby artichokes, befriends a Jordanian who
has lived in the city for 30 years; he observes the “sex on the surface of everything” that is particular to Italy but reminiscent of Libya. He considers his wife,
who will probably never meet his father,
overlaying the history of art onto the present in the manner of John Berger or Teju
Cole, two similarly associative writers.
There are ambulatory musings on the
fabric of cities and the rips in it, as when Mr
Matar uses the anti-Semitism and Islamophobia unleashed by the Black Death to
hint at today’s politics. The result is an intensely moving book, at once an aﬃrmation of life’s quiet dignities in the face of
loss, and a portrait of a city that comes to
stand for all cities—which exist, Mr Matar
postulates, to “render us more intelligent
and more intelligible to each other”. 7
Literary posterity

War of the words

Inventing Tomorrow: H.G. Wells and the
Twentieth Century. By Sarah Cole.
Columbia University Press; 392 pages; $35
and £27

I

n an episode of “Downton Abbey”, Maggie Smith’s character, Violet Crawley, expresses horror at the brisk march of innovation. “First electricity,” she complains,
“now telephones; sometimes I feel as if I
were living in an H.G. Wells novel.” It is an
apt line, for Wells (1866-1946) believed that
modernity presented a “bristling multitude” of problems—and that ﬁction was
the best medium through which to examine them. Combining a gift for shrewd social commentary with far-reaching prophecy, he foresaw inventions such as
television and air-conditioning, as well as
coining the terms “war of the worlds”,
“atomic bomb” and “time machine”.

Books & arts

Yet despite his blazing intuitions and
his sense of the darker repercussions of
technological progress, Wells is now an
unfashionable ﬁgure. Virginia Woolf
lumped him together with Arnold Bennett
and John Galsworthy as drab “materialists”— writers prosaically interested in the
fabric of the world, rather than the inner
life. That judgment caught on. Today only a
few of Wells’s books are much read, and
they are studied more often than enjoyed.
His style, shaped by a mission to educate,
can seem pedantic. Readers balk at his passion for eugenics, attitude to what he called
“the inferior races” and tendency to trivialise women. A glut of biographical material
has suggested that he was a petulant egomaniac who treated personal relationships
like experiments.
In “Inventing Tomorrow”, Sarah Cole of
Columbia University sets out to reclaim
Wells as a visionary and a radical. Without
denying his ﬂaws, she characterises him as
a “global thinker”, and her dense, ultimately rewarding book shows the grand sweep
of his interests and erudition. Ms Cole does
not dwell on the details of his biography—
the suburban childhood in a bug-infested
house in Kent, or his being judged, at 13, too
unreﬁned to be an apprentice to a draper.
Instead she concentrates on his ideas: on
the importance of scientiﬁc education, the
hazards of genetic engineering, the violent
wastefulness of Western culture, nuclear
proliferation, and the need to eradicate national identity and launch a socialist
world-state, in which everyone would
speak a single language.
Wells was sure that imaginative literature had a crucial role to play in public conversations about these subjects. Yet for a
book that seeks to present him as a writer
deserving a mass audience, “Inventing Tomorrow” is sometimes hard going. Ms
Cole’s own phrasing can be opaque. She applauds Wells’s novel “Ann Veronica” for the
“jouissance it purveys” and “The Island of
Doctor Moreau” for the “hybridity it literalises”, and refers to his work being “washed
by waves of violence and decimation”.
Still, she succeeds in calling attention
to the expansiveness of Wells’s thinking.
And she investigates neglected areas of his
writing, among them the paciﬁst pamphlets he produced during the ﬁrst world
war; she is especially enthusiastic about
lesser-known novels such as “Mr Britling
Sees It Through” (1916), which pictures the
impact of conﬂict on non-combatants, and
the heftily philosophical “The World of
William Clissold” (1926). Some of Wells’s
ideas and personal traits were certainly rebarbative, but he emerges from this wideranging account as a passionate and persistent advocate of social change, and of literature’s capacity to shape it—driven as he
was by the belief that modern life is a “race
between education and catastrophe”. 7

77

American history

Dual destiny

Lakota America. By Pekka Hamalainen.
Yale University Press; 544 pages; $35 and £25

T

he lakota, a division of the Sioux nation, were long dismissed as “a foil of
the American condition”. Like other Native
Americans, writes Pekka Hamalainen of
the University of Oxford (also the author of
“The Comanche Empire”), they were seen
as the helpless “victims” of Manifest Destiny—foes of the Lewis and Clark expedition,
General Custer’s nemesis, the martyrs of
the Wounded Knee massacre.
In “Lakota America”, a comprehensive
history of the tribe, Mr Hamalainen portrays them as trailblazers of empire, and
forceful actors in the power games of North
America. Far from ﬂeeing the onslaught of
civilisation, the Lakota’s hot pursuit of beaver and buﬀalo drew colonial traders into
the West in their wake. Over 200 years they
morphed from trappers wielding stone
axes along the Mississippi to “the pirates of
the Missouri”, exacting tolls on commercial river traﬃc, and then to nomad warlords of the Great Plains.
The Lakota and American empires were
similar. The Lakota had their own version
of Manifest Destiny through their hold on
the Black Hills (in what became South Dakota and Wyoming), which they believed to
be the birthplace of humanity. “The Mysterious One has given us this place,” says a
chieftain in an origin myth, “and now it is
up to us to try to expand ourselves.” In fact,
the Black Hills had been seized from other
tribes through conquest. “In this we did
what the white men do when they want the
lands of the Indians,” said a Lakota repre- 1

78

Books & arts

2 sentative in 1851. They frequently drove oc-

cupiers from their homes and forced others into quasi-serfdom.
Unlike European settlers, however, the
Lakota did not segregate other peoples, absorbing native and European allies into
their kinship system through adoption or
marriage. And unlike the United States,
when they conquered they did not claim
the land itself but its resources, imposing
control over buﬀalo, water, food and people. By 1876 their territory stretched from
Kansas to the Canadian border, and from
the Mississippi to the Rocky Mountains.

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Time and again, outside powers were
forced to accommodate them. The Lakota
were adept at playing the wasicus [white
men] against each other. In the 18th century’s swirl of colonial rivalries, they and
their allies parlayed loyalties into guns and
used them to ﬁght opposing tribes. Coveting their hold on the Missouri trade in beaver pelts, and “because of their immense
power”, President Thomas Jeﬀerson wanted Lewis and Clark to win their allegiance.
Even with the advent of the reservation
system, the Lakota were not boxed in. They
ﬂouted reservation borders, believing they

had sovereignty wherever the buﬀalo
roamed. They used a treaty conference to
claim lands that did not belong to them.
But Lakota power was brittle. Their empire was built on unsustainable resources
such as the declining buﬀalo population.
After the United States decimated that species in the late 19th century, the Lakota fell
rapidly. They had to rely on food handouts;
the army conﬁscated their horses and
guns. Still, while there was no escaping the
ﬂood of American “progress”, Mr Hamalainen shows that, for a time, some indigenous tribes surfed the crest of the wave. 7

Johnson Don’t fear the Writernator
Computer-generated writing will never replace the human kind

M

any people will be familiar with
automated writing through two
features of Gmail. Smart Reply proﬀers
brief answers to routine emails. If someone asks “Do you want to meet at 3pm?”,
Gmail oﬀers one-click responses such as
“Sure!” More strikingly, Smart Compose
kicks in as you write, suggesting endings
to your sentences. Both are not only
rendered in ﬂawless English; they often
eerily seem to have guessed what you
want to say. If someone sends bad news,
Smart Reply might oﬀer “Ugh.”
The New Yorker’s John Seabrook recently described a more powerful version of this technology, called gpt-2,
which can ably mimic his magazine’s
style. Such systems use a digital network
of billions of artiﬁcial “neurons” with
virtual “synapses”—the connections
between neurons—that strengthen as
the network “learns”, in this case from 40
gigabytes-worth of online writing. The
version Mr Seabrook tested was reﬁned
with back-issues of the New Yorker.
The metaphor of the brain is tempting, but “neurons” and “synapses” deserve those scare-quotes. The system is
merely making some—admittedly very
sophisticated—statistical guesses about
which words follow which in a New
Yorker-style sentence. At a simple level,
imagine beginning an email with “Happy…” Having looked at millions of other
emails, Gmail can plausibly guess that
the next word will be “birthday”. gpt-2
makes predictions of the same sort.
What eludes computers is creativity.
By virtue of having been trained on past
compositions, they can only be derivative. Furthermore, they cannot conceive
a topic or goal on their own, much less
plan how to get there with logic and style.
At various points in the online version of
his article, readers can see how gpt-2

would have carried on writing Mr Seabrook’s piece for him. The prose gives the
impression of being human. But on closer
inspection it is empty, even incoherent.
Meaningless prose is not only the
preserve of artiﬁcial intelligence. There is
already a large quantity of writing that
seems to make sense, but ultimately
doesn’t, at least to a majority of readers. In
1996 Alan Sokal famously submitted a
bogus article to a humanities journal, with
ideas that were complete nonsense but
with language that expertly simulated
fashionable post-modernist academic
prose. It was accepted. Three scholars
repeated the ruse in 2017, getting four of 20
fake papers published. Humans already
produce language that is devoid of meaning, intentionally and otherwise.
But to truly write, you must ﬁrst have
something to say. Computers do not. They
await instructions. Given input, they
provide output. Such systems can be seeded with a topic, or the ﬁrst few paragraphs,
and be told to “write”. While the result may
be grammatical English, this should not be
confused with the purposeful kind.

To compose meaningful essays, the
likes of gpt-2 will ﬁrst have to be integrated with databases of real-world
knowledge. This is possible at the moment only on a very limited scale. Ask
Apple’s Siri or Amazon’s Alexa for a single fact—say, what year “Top Gun” came
out—and you will get the answer. But ask
them to assemble the facts to prove a
case, even at a straightforward level—“Do
gun laws reduce gun crime?”—and they
will ﬂounder.
An advance in integrating knowledge
would then have to be married to another
breakthrough: teaching text-generation
systems to go beyond sentences to structures. Mr Seabrook found that the longer
the text he solicited from gpt-2, the more
obvious it was that the work it produced
was gibberish. Each sentence was ﬁne on
its own; remarkably, three or four back to
back could stay on topic, apparently
cohering. But machines are aeons away
from being able to recreate rhetorical and
argumentative ﬂow across paragraphs
and pages. Not only can today’s journalists expect to ﬁnish their careers without
competition from the Writernator—
today’s parents can tell their children
that they still need to learn to write, too.
Aside from making scribblers redundant, a common worry is that such systems will be able to ﬂood social media
and online comment sections with
semi-coherent but angry ramblings that
are designed to divide and enrage. In
reality, that may not be much of a departure from the tenor of such websites
now, nor much of a disaster. Perhaps a
ﬂood of furious auto-babble will force
future readers to distinguish between
the illusion of coherence and the genuine article. If so, the Writernator, much
like the Terminator, would even come to
do the world some good.

Courses

79

Fellowships

80

Economic & ﬁnancial indicators

The Economist November 2nd 2019

Economic data

United States
China
Japan
Britain
Canada
Euro area
Austria
Belgium
France
Germany
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Spain
Czech Republic
Denmark
Norway
Poland
Russia
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Australia
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
South Korea
Taiwan
Thailand
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Mexico
Peru
Egypt
Israel
Saudi Arabia
South Africa

Gross domestic product

Consumer prices

% change on year ago
latest
quarter* 2019†

% change on year ago
latest
2019†

2.0
6.0
1.0
1.3
1.6
1.2
1.5
1.6
1.3
0.4
1.9
0.1
1.8
2.3
2.5
2.2
-0.7
4.2
0.9
1.0
0.2
-1.5
1.4
0.5
5.0
5.0
4.9
3.3
5.5
0.1
2.0
2.4
2.3
0.6
1.0
1.9
3.4
-0.4
1.2
5.7
2.0
2.4
0.9

1.9
Q3
6.1
Q2
1.3
Q2
-0.9
Q2
3.7
Q2
0.8
Q2
-1.4
Q3
1.6
Q3
1.0
Q2
-0.3
Q2
3.4
Q2
0.3
Q2
1.6
Q2
1.6
Q2
3.0
Q2
3.6
Q2
1.0
Q2
3.2
Q2
na
Q2
0.5
Q2
1.1
Q2
na
Q2
1.9
Q2
-1.7
Q2
2.9
Q2
na
Q2
na
2019** na
Q2
5.7
Q3
0.6
Q3
1.6
Q2
2.7
Q2
2.4
Q2
-1.3
Q2
1.8
Q2
3.4
Q2
5.6
Q3
0.4
Q2
4.1
Q2
na
Q2
0.6
2018
na
Q2
3.1
Q3

2.2
6.2
1.0
1.2
1.6
1.2
1.4
1.2
1.3
0.5
1.9
0.1
1.7
2.1
2.6
1.9
1.4
4.0
1.1
1.3
0.8
-0.3
1.7
0.2
5.2
5.1
4.4
3.3
5.7
0.7
1.8
2.4
2.4
-3.3
0.8
2.6
3.1
0.3
2.6
5.5
3.2
1.0
0.7

1.7
3.0
0.2
1.7
1.9
0.8
1.2
0.5
0.9
1.1
-0.1
0.3
2.6
0.2
2.7
0.5
1.5
2.6
4.0
1.5
0.1
9.3
1.7
3.3
4.0
3.4
1.1
11.4
0.9
0.5
-0.4
0.4
0.3
53.5
2.9
2.1
3.8
3.0
1.9
4.8
0.3
-0.7
4.1

Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Oct
Sep
Oct
Sep
Sep
Sep
Oct
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Q3
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep‡
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep
Sep

Unemployment
rate

Current-account
balance

Budget
balance

%

% of GDP, 2019†

% of GDP, 2019†

1.8
2.7
1.0
1.9
2.0
1.2
1.6
1.8
1.3
1.3
0.6
0.7
2.7
0.9
2.7
0.8
2.3
2.0
4.6
1.8
0.5
15.6
1.5
3.0
3.4
3.1
0.8
9.2
2.3
0.5
0.4
0.5
0.9
53.7
3.8
2.3
3.5
3.6
2.2
8.8
1.0
-1.2
4.5

3.5
3.6
2.2
3.9
5.5
7.4
4.5
5.5
8.5
3.1
16.9
9.5
4.4
13.8
2.1
3.8
3.7
5.1
4.5
7.1
2.3
13.9
5.2
2.9
7.2
5.0
3.3
5.8
5.4
2.3
3.1
3.7
1.0
10.6
11.8
7.0
10.8
3.5
6.1
7.5
3.8
5.6
29.1

Sep
Q3§
Aug
Jul††
Sep
Aug
Aug
Aug
Aug
Aug
Jul
Aug
Sep
Aug
Aug‡
Aug
Aug‡‡
Sep§
Sep§
Sep§
Sep
Jul§
Sep
Sep‡‡
Sep
Q1§
Aug§
2018
Q3§
Q3
Sep§
Sep
Aug§
Q2§
Aug§
Sep§‡‡
Aug§
Sep
Sep§
Q2§
Aug
Q2
Q3§

-2.4
1.4
3.2
-4.0
-2.3
2.9
1.7
0.1
-0.7
6.6
-2.9
2.0
9.7
0.8
0.5
6.8
5.4
-0.6
6.6
3.5
9.3
-0.2
0.1
4.8
-1.7
-2.4
4.5
-3.5
-1.1
14.4
3.0
12.0
6.0
-1.4
-1.7
-2.6
-4.4
-1.1
-2.1
-0.9
2.3
1.4
-3.9

Interest rates

Currency units

10-yr gov't bonds change on
latest,%
year ago, bp

per $
% change
Oct 30th on year ago

-4.8
-4.5
-2.9
-1.8
-0.8
-1.1
0.1
-1.0
-3.2
0.5
0.4
-2.4
0.6
-2.3
0.2
1.0
6.5
-2.0
2.4
0.4
0.5
-2.9
0.1
0.1
-3.8
-2.0
-3.5
-8.9
-3.1
-0.3
0.6
-1.0
-2.8
-4.3
-5.7
-1.3
-2.5
-2.7
-2.0
-6.7
-3.9
-6.7
-4.8

1.8
3.1 §§
-0.2
0.8
1.5
-0.4
-0.1
-0.1
nil
-0.4
1.2
1.1
-0.2
0.3
1.4
-0.3
1.4
2.0
6.6
-0.1
-0.5
12.9
1.1
1.5
6.7
7.0
3.5
11.6 †††
4.5
1.8
1.8
0.7
1.6
11.3
4.4
3.1
5.9
6.8
5.6
na
0.9
na
8.4

-114
-27.0
-26.0
-61.0
-100
-74.0
-71.0
-87.0
-77.0
-74.0
-302
-239
-73.0
-120
-73.0
-66.0
-54.0
-115
-214
-67.0
-53.0
-504
-144
-86.0
-117
-159
-72.0
-41.0
-345
-72.0
-46.0
-20.0
-100
562
-375
-140
-129
-192
64.0
nil
-145
nil
-83.0

7.06
109
0.78
1.32
0.90
0.90
0.90
0.90
0.90
0.90
0.90
0.90
0.90
22.9
6.72
9.21
3.83
64.0
9.69
0.99
5.71
1.46
7.84
70.9
14,027
4.18
156
50.9
1.36
1,168
30.5
30.2
59.6
4.02
739
3,388
19.2
3.35
16.1
3.53
3.75
15.0

-1.4
3.6
1.3
-0.8
-2.2
-2.2
-2.2
-2.2
-2.2
-2.2
-2.2
-2.2
-2.2
-0.7
-2.2
-8.8
-0.5
2.4
-5.5
1.0
-3.7
-3.4
nil
3.9
8.5
nil
-14.8
5.3
1.5
-2.5
1.6
10.1
-38.2
-7.7
-6.0
-5.6
4.3
0.3
11.0
5.1
nil
-2.3

Source: Haver Analytics. *% change on previous quarter, annual rate. †The Economist Intelligence Unit estimate/forecast. §Not seasonally adjusted. ‡New series. **Year ending June. ††Latest 3 months. ‡‡3-month moving
average. §§5-year yield. †††Dollar-denominated bonds.

Commodities

Markets
% change on:
In local currency

United States S&P 500
United States NAScomp
China Shanghai Comp
China Shenzhen Comp
Japan Nikkei 225
Japan Topix
Britain FTSE 100
Canada S&P TSX
Euro area EURO STOXX 50
France CAC 40
Germany DAX*
Italy FTSE/MIB
Netherlands AEX
Spain IBEX 35
Poland WIG
Russia RTS, $ terms
Switzerland SMI
Turkey BIST
Australia All Ord.
Hong Kong Hang Seng
India BSE
Indonesia IDX
Malaysia KLSE

Index
Oct 30th

3,046.8
8,304.0
2,939.3
1,628.6
22,843.1
1,665.9
7,330.8
16,501.4
3,620.3
5,765.9
12,910.2
22,646.1
581.6
9,284.5
58,430.5
1,431.9
10,255.0
98,692.0
6,794.7
26,667.7
40,051.9
6,295.8
1,580.0

one
week

1.4
2.3
-0.1
0.6
1.0
1.7
1.0
1.0
0.4
2.0
0.9
1.3
1.0
-1.1
0.8
2.8
2.3
-1.1
0.2
0.4
2.5
0.6
0.7

% change on:

Dec 31st
2018

21.5
25.1
17.9
28.5
14.1
11.5
9.0
15.2
20.6
21.9
22.3
23.6
19.2
8.7
1.3
34.3
21.7
8.1
19.0
3.2
11.0
1.6
-6.5

index
Oct 30th

Pakistan KSE
Singapore STI
South Korea KOSPI
Taiwan TWI
Thailand SET
Argentina MERV
Brazil BVSP
Mexico IPC
Egypt EGX 30
Israel TA-125
Saudi Arabia Tadawul
South Africa JSE AS
World, dev'd MSCI
Emerging markets MSCI

33,761.4
3,207.9
2,080.3
11,380.3
1,601.8
33,889.0
108,407.5
43,741.6
14,477.8
1,577.2
7,792.8
55,872.6
2,237.3
1,041.5

one
week

1.0
2.0
nil
1.3
-1.8
3.4
0.8
0.4
2.5
0.4
-1.2
0.5
1.3
1.0

Dec 31st
2018

-8.9
4.5
1.9
17.0
2.4
11.9
23.3
5.0
11.1
18.3
-0.4
5.9
18.8
7.8

Investment grade
High-yield

latest

156
493

Dec 31st
2018

190
571

Sources: Datastream from Refinitiv; Standard & Poor's Global Fixed
Income Research. *Total return index.

% change on
Oct 22nd Oct 29th* month
year

Dollar Index
All Items
109.0
Food
95.2
Industrials
All
121.9
Non-food agriculturals 95.2
Metals
129.8

109.9
95.7

-0.2
1.4

3.3
4.8

123.2
96.5
131.1

-1.3
4.2
-2.4

2.3
-12.7
6.3

Sterling Index
All items

128.9

130.0

-5.4

2.0

Euro Index
All items

108.6

109.7

-2.0

5.6

1,484.7

1,490.3

0.5

21.7

60.2

61.9

4.2

-18.8

Gold
$ per oz
Brent
$ per barrel

US corporate bonds, spread over Treasuries
Basis points

The Economist commodity-price index
2015=100

Sources: Bloomberg; CME Group; Cotlook; Datastream from Refinitiv;
Fastmarkets; FT; ICCO; ICO; ISO; Live Rice Index; LME; NZ Wool
Services; Thompson Lloyd & Ewart; Urner Barry; WSJ. *Provisional.

For more countries and additional data, visit
Economist.com/indicators

Graphic detail Public opinion

The Economist November 2nd 2019 81

On most issues, public opinion changes mainly as younger generations replace older ones
“Greatest” generation*
Born before 1928
49%

1970

Silent generation
Born 1928-45

Share of
sample
0%

27%

2018

1970

Generation X
Born 1965-80

Baby-boomers
Born 1946-64
8%
2018

23%

28%

1970

2018

Millennials and
Generation Z
Born after 1980

28%

Share of change
explained by:
36%

Changing
demography

3%

1%
1970

2018

1970

2018

People changing
their views

United States, % agreeing by generation
Communist books should be
removed from public libraries

75

National average

Greatest*

Communist books should
be removed from libraries

Abortion should be
allowed for any reason

75

Until recently, baby-boomers were
more pro-choice than both their
parents and their children were

50

Interracial marriage
is wrong
50

Silent
Gen X

Baby-boomer

Tolerance for communist speech
has risen solely because older
generations have died off
1975

80

90

25

25

0

0

2000

10

18

1975

75

80

90

2000

10

78

22

Gay people should be
allowed to get married

Millennial & Gen Z

75

Babyboomer

50

10

18

Greatest*
25

0
1985

90

25

2000

62

38

Men are better at
politics than women
57

43

Silent

Support for gay marriage
has grown steadily within
all age groups

0
2000

Abortion should be
allowed for any reason

The government spends
too little on black people

National average

25

90

22

Working women can
be good mothers

75

18

Gen X

In a “Great Awokening”, the share of people
who think that minority groups suffer from
injustice has surged since 2013

80

78

Millennial & Gen Z

The government spends too little
to improve black people’s lives

1975

100%

10

18

Gay people should be
allowed to get married
45

55

Marijuana should
be legalised
46

54

*And earlier Sources: General Social Survey; The Economist

Talkin’ ’bout my
generation
Societies change their minds faster
than people do

A

s recently as the late 1980s, most
Americans thought gay sex was not
only immoral but also something that
ought to be illegal. Yet by 2015, when the Supreme Court legalised same-sex marriage,
there were only faint murmurs of protest.
Today two-thirds of Americans support it,
and even those who frown on it make no
serious eﬀort to criminalise it.
This surge in tolerance illustrates how
fast public opinion can shift. The change
occurred because two trends reinforced
each other. First, many socially conservative old people have died, and their places

in the polling samples have been taken by
liberal millennials. In addition, people
have changed their minds. Support for gay
marriage has risen by some 30 percentage
points within each generation since 2004,
from 20% to 49% among those born in
1928-45 and from 45% to 78% among those
born after 1980.
However, this shift in opinion makes
gay marriage an exception among political
issues. Since 1972 the University of Chicago
has run a General Social Survey every year
or two, which asks Americans their views
on a wide range of topics. Over time, public
opinion has grown more liberal. But this is
mostly the result of generational replacement, not of changes of heart.
For example, in 1972, 42% of Americans
said communist books should be banned
from public libraries. Views varied widely
by age: 55% of people born before 1928 (who
were 45 or older at the time) supported a
ban, compared with 37% of people aged

27-44 and just 25% of those 26 or younger.
Today, only a quarter of Americans favour
this policy. However, within each of these
birth cohorts, views today are almost identical to those from 47 years ago. The change
was caused entirely by the share of respondents born before 1928 falling from 49% to
nil, and that of millennials—who were not
born until at least 1981, and staunchly oppose such a ban—rising from zero to 36%.
Not every issue is as extreme as these
two. But on six of the eight questions we examined—all save gay marriage and marijuana legalisation—demographic shifts accounted for a bigger share of overall
movement in public opinion than changes
in beliefs within cohorts. On average, their
impact was about twice as large.
Social activists devote themselves to
changing people’s views, and sometimes
succeed. In general, however, battles for
hearts and minds are won by grinding attrition more often than by rapid conquest. 7

82

Obituary Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi

The blood-soaked scholar

Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi (born Ibrahim Awad), leader of Islamic
State, blew himself up on October 26th, aged 48

N

o one paid particular attention to the boy who haunted his local mosque in Samarra, 60 miles north of Baghdad, and Ibrahim Awad never said much to them. When he did, he mumbled,
being shy. His father taught Koranic chant there, so in his spare
time Ibrahim would do the same, unobserved in some corner,
muttering over the holy book. When it came to singing out,
though, he would suddenly ﬁnd his voice, making the words ring
through the building. They noticed him then.
In much the same way, over the years, he worked unobtrusively
towards leadership of the world’s most feared terrorist group, Islamic State: towards control of an area covering 34,000 square
miles, and command over bloody and random attacks as far aﬁeld
as Paris, Sri Lanka, Florida and Manchester. He moved from one jihadist outﬁt to another invisibly and with discipline. Although his
head was full of lions, unsheathed swords and inﬁdels dying in
their own blood, he did not ﬁght. He behaved like a secretary, serving the tea at meetings and fading into the background. One of his
aliases was “the Ghost”. When he was not driving by night to meet
jihadists, he was ﬁnishing his doctoral thesis on medieval Koranic
recitation. But in June 2014, in the pulpit of the Grand Mosque in
Mosul, the city his forces had easily overrun only days before, he
once more found his voice. Now that is had territory—the city of
Raqqa, too, had fallen to him—he declared a Sunni caliphate and
himself Caliph Ibrahim, the most pious, the warrior, the reviver,
who would take Baghdad and lead his mujahideen as far as Rome.
He not only spoke, but posted his sermon on YouTube. The world
noticed him then.
He also surprised those who thought they knew him, the family
man and keen footballer, living for years in a garret by the Tobchi
mosque and teaching children there. Obviously he had been galvanised by the American invasion and his imprisonment in 2004 at
Camp Bucca, where he taught the other yellow-clad inmates so se-

The Economist November 2nd 2019

renely that his crusader-captors thought him no threat, and let
him out. But his interest in the strict imposition of Islamic law
came earlier. At university, prompted by an uncle, he had joined a
jihadist-Salaﬁst wing of the Muslim Brotherhood. Long before that
in the Samarra mosque he would devoutly clean and sweep, aware
that his ancestors had won respect for doing that task. He would
chastise his neighbours for their un-Islamic smoking, tattoos, or
dancing with women. Friends called him “The Believer”, and he
could unsettle them with his stare long before he had power
enough to order the killing of anyone who deﬁed him.
Time and again his Mosul sermon nodded to history and to the
Prophet. That was the diﬀerence he, a scholar, made to the jihadist
movement. He was not an engineer like Osama bin Laden or a doctor like Ayman al-Zawahiri, both leaders of al-Qaeda. He brought
intellectual weight, as well as the membership he claimed in the
Qurayshi tribe, descendants of the Prophet. When he spoke at Mosul he wore black robes to evoke the Abbasids, the most powerful
caliphs of early Islam. His nom de guerre, coined earlier, anticipated this day: Abu Bakr, the ﬁrst caliph after Muhammad’s death; alBaghdadi, the Abbasids’ capital. The caliphate itself was ordained
by Allah, the ultimate means for the ever-bickering Arabs to unite
as a holy nation. They had forgotten it. He would build it.
From the moment he had joined al-Qaeda in Iraq in 2005, he
had global aims. When, the next year, it re-formed into Islamic
State of Iraq, he became its propagandist: at ﬁrst in Nineveh province, then as far as he could get. In 2010 he became its leader; by
2013, he relaunched it as plain Islamic State; by 2014 he had broken
from al-Qaeda, rejecting Mr Zawahiri’s orders to stay in Iraq. There
was too much to do in Syria as it collapsed: coalitions to pursue,
ﬁghters to recruit, oilﬁelds and hostages to seize to provide a revenue stream. Assiduously he drew up dossiers of local police and
potential donors, looking out for anyone useful, as he had made
use of Baathists and Saddam’s former oﬃcers in Iraq. Meanwhile
he targeted ﬂaunters of Islamic law, in beach resorts or nightclubs,
no matter. Each strike seemed to draw young men and some young
women too, from all corners, to follow the black “I testify” ﬂag. By
bold leaps and bounds his potential caliphate grew.
In the cities he conquered he set up oﬃces to take in taxes and
traﬃc ﬁnes, register babies and licence marriages, as in a proper
state. He imposed the sharia in which he was expert: hands hacked
oﬀ for stealing, whippings for drunkenness, adulterous women
stoned. He also expanded it, justifying everything smoothly with
holy writ. Unbelievers were expelled or killed if they did not pay
their taxes. Yazidis were driven from their homes and their women
abducted to be sold and raped with organised eﬃciency. Enemies
were cruciﬁed, burned alive, drowned in cages, beheaded with
slow saws, while everything was ﬁlmed and posted online for the
world to observe and dread. He sometimes shared the videos ﬁrst
with the kufr women he kept chained in a nearby room for his own
pleasure. Raping an inﬁdel woman was a spiritual exercise that
brought a believer close to God.
While all this went on he was still hidden, still constantly on
the move. Visitors who wished to see him were stripped of all devices, blindfolded and driven for hours to a blank room, where he
would softly sermonise. Many intelligence agencies declared him
dead, but they were wrong. He made audio exhortations, and in
2019 showed himself again, congratulating his ﬁghters for the
Easter church bombings in Sri Lanka that had killed 290 people.
Now, like bin Laden, he had a Kalashnikov as a prop. His caliphate
had crumbled away, but he fortiﬁed his followers by invoking the
Battle of the Trench in 627, when Muhammad with 3,000 men had
prevailed against a force of 10,000, and had pulled his Ahzab rivals
over to his side. He appealed to the soldiers of the caliphate to ﬁght
like that, to the last drop of blood.
Muhammad had dug a trench to frustrate his enemies. Caliph
Ibrahim had dug a tunnel, but it was dead-ended, and he had to deploy his suicide-vest to make himself disappear. 7

Stories of an extraordinary world
Eye-opening narratives, including style, design, culture, food and travel
Get 1843 on newsstands, at 1843magazine.com or on The Economist app

